NANCY PELOSI is not afraid to trumpet her strengths. When asked why she should continue to serve as Democratic leader, a job she has held for 16 years, the most powerful woman politician in America said: “Well, I’m a master legislator, I’m a strategic, politically astute leader, my leadership is recognised around the country, and that is why I am able to attract the support that I do.” Both formidable self-belief and a dose of Machiavellian guile were evident on November 28th as Mrs Pelosi saw off a potentially fatal insurgency against her leadership. Last week 16 House Democrats published a letter calling for a change of tack. An additional group of moderates, from the bipartisan Problem Solvers caucus, then threatened not to back Mrs Pelosi unless she vowed to make it easier to pass bipartisan bills. Mrs Pelosi, who was a highly regarded Speaker between 2007 and 2011, making her the first woman to hold the job, chipped away at the first group. She wooed one of its members, Brian Higgins, a congressman from New York, by promising him she would move forward on two causes close to his heart, infrastructure investment and Medicare enrolment. Another member, Stephen Lynch of Massachusetts, said he would vote for Mrs Pelosi if she won the party’s nomination. She meanwhile neutralised the only person who had openly considered running against her: Martha Fudge, a congresswoman from Ohio. She did so by promising to restore a dormant committee on voting rights and make Ms Fudge chairperson. The other group she dealt with hours before the Democratic caucus gathered to vote for its Speaker nominee by agreeing to several of their demands. On November 28th Mrs Pelosi announced, as expected, that she had won a Democratic secret ballot, with 203 voting for her and 32 against. That is a long way short of the Democratic votes she will need on January 3rd when her bid for the Speakership goes to a full House vote. She will need a House majority, or 218 votes. If the Democrats end up with 235 seats, which looks likely, Mrs Pelosi could afford to lose only 17 Democratic votes. She will probably pull that off, too. Her Democratic critics are mostly junior House members and new arrivals, who had criticised her leadership during the campaign in an attempt to woo conservative voters. But the Democratic big guns are behind Mrs Pelosi. And it is difficult to maintain an insurgency without a leader. The rumblings against Mrs Pelosi will continue, nonetheless. The main dissidents, Tim Ryan of Ohio and Seth Moulton of Massachusetts, have long complained that Mrs Pelosi’s unpopularity with independent voters costs her party votes. (Mr Moulton’s criticisms often take the form of back-handed compliments: “God knows she’s a good arm-twister,” he once said). Her age is also a problem. The Democrats are increasingly dependent on younger voters. Yet the top three House Democrats— Mrs Pelosi, Steny Hoyer, and James Clyburn—are all in their late 70s. They almost had a fourth septuagenarian leader, too. But in another vote on November 28th, Hakeem Jeffries of New York was elected chairman of the House caucus, defeating 72-year-old Barbara Lee of California. The fact that there are few Democrats ready to take over from Mrs Pelosi may be the biggest indictment of her long command. Only recently, by pushing Mr Jeffries and other mid-level leaders, has she shown any interest in grooming a successor. In the absence of a compelling alternative leader, however, most House Democrats will be thankful for the one they have. Mrs Pelosi remains an unusually tough and canny party manager, as her latest survival act has underlined.