FOR A wandering people, Andalusia, at the edge of the Iberian peninsula, is the end of the road. Many Roma have settled there and, compared to communities in other European countries, they are well integrated. They make use of education and health care, as well as housing and employment programmes; culturally, Roma are the lifeblood of flamenco. But when it comes to representation on screen, they are either invisible or mocked. That is why two recent films looking at Roma lives, both directed by non-Roma Spaniards, were scrutinised. One took the top prize at the San Sebastián Film Festival in September, while the other drew complaints and a boycott from Roma associations. The ruckus was caused by “Carmen & Lola” (pictured left). Directed by Arantxa Echevarría, it follows two girls who fall in love in a Roma community that sees them as wives-in-waiting. When one of them is engaged to a man she hardly knows, her father boasts that she has never left the house alone and doesn’t own a mobile phone. Both are lies, but the point remains: this is a patriarchal community, and one that is poor and devout. Homosexuality is neither understood nor accepted. The girls try to hide it, but in the end it is exposed. Even a brief description gives an idea of why the film annoyed some Roma. A rare outing on the big screen portrays their community perfectly in line with people’s prejudices: these Roma work exclusively in tatty markets, and they dance at gypsy weddings in flash suits and extravagantly beaded outfits. They don’t do tarot cards, but they do do exorcisms. The stereotypes are reasserted, rather than nuanced or questioned. “Carmen & Lola” is a bland story of forbidden love to which the word Roma was added like a pinch of chilli. The topic was still raw when Isaki Lacuesta’s film arrived two months later. “Between Two Waters” (pictured right, and below) is a sequel to a film he made in 2006 about Isra and Cheíto, two real-life Roma brothers. A mix of fact and fiction, this one starts as Isra is released from prison and Cheíto, who is a chef on a military vessel, returns from sea. They meet back home in San Fernando, just outside Cádiz, where both are trying to find a future for themselves and their families. That they are Roma is rarely said aloud, but it is written in the details: the very particular Spanish they speak among friends, and the freelance jobs that Isra juggles, salvaging scrap metal and picking seashells out of the silt. Real events from the actors’ lives, such as jobs and tattoos, the death of their father and the birth of a child, are incorporated into the script. The intimate portrayal of life’s vicissitudes through time gives it the feel of an Andalusian “Boyhood”; where that film goes from childhood to adolescence in suburban America, Mr Lacuesta follows his subjects from adolescence to adulthood in an impoverished corner of Spain. San Fernando has one of the highest unemployment rates in Spain (around 30%). It is a place of beauty and hardship, and of the struggle and yearning that also power flamenco. Mr Lacuesta’s films borrow their titles from albums of Camarón de la Isla and Paco de Lucia, two of the great flamenco artists, but they don’t offer romanticised depictions of Roma life. Quite the opposite: Mr Lacuesta is obsessed with the honesty of his portrayal even to the point of repetitive, aseptic realism. His films feel neither scripted nor acted, as if there were no lighting or make-up or extras. There is little drama, but its characters and events ring true. Realism is the key difference between the two films, as it means recognising the truth within stereotypes, but not trading in them. They are also set apart by the depth of the Roma element. Where in “Carmen & Lola” it feels like an artificial and gaudy detail, impossible to ignore, in “Between Two Waters” it is quietly essential. The story at the heart of “Carmen & Lola” could be transplanted to another setting or minority group, but that of “Between Two Waters” could not, for it would pluck the heart out of the film. The stakes involved were high because neither director is Roma themselves (Ms Echevarría is Basque, while Mr Lacuesta is Catalan). They come from two of Spain’s richest regions, in every sense on the opposite side of Spain to Cádiz. Them making a film about Roma required unusual sensitivity. “Between Two Waters” proves that you do not need to be part of a group to make a good film about it. “Carmen & Lola” is a reminder to tread with caution. “Between Two Waters” is released in Spain on November 30th