LAST YEAR the number of people fleeing war or persecution rose to a record 68.5m worldwide. More than 6m were Syrians who escaped their country’s civil war, arriving at the Shatila refugee camp in Beirut in their thousands. Forced to make life anew, they live cheek by jowl with Palestinian families who have eked out a living there since the camp’s creation in 1949. Conditions are cramped and appalling: the number of residents has swelled to 40,000 from 20,000 in 2011. Yet out of this difficult, heart-rending situation, a new kind of literature has emerged. Peirene Press is a London-based publisher of European novels in English translation, whose founder, Meike Ziervogel, commissions writing on contemporary themes. In response to the migration crisis, she and a Syrian colleague, Suhir Helal, set out to find Syrian writers and publish their work. At Shatila they found nine people, mostly Syrians who had arrived in the camp in the past five years, to take a three-day writing workshop and learn the elements of storytelling. None had written a story before; most had never read a novel. Yet each produced a short story in Arabic six weeks later. The authors were asked to write not about their flight, but about life at the camp. They created characters and situations that were translated into English by Nashwa Gowanlock and then shaped into “Shatila Stories”, a novel published this month that is part love story, part tragedy. Told in 11 short chapters, it weaves multiple personal tales into a remarkably rich and moving whole. Readers enter a world they would otherwise never know: of lethal electricity wires and persistent mud, the brutal rule of the camp’s drug lord, women’s struggle for autonomy, the hope born of music and young love. Lives in crisis are complex, and the novel reflects these many nuances and perspectives. Indeed, it is the collaborative process by which it was written that creates this sense of depth and authenticity. “Most of our authors were scared and said, ‘how will we ever get out what we have to say?’” reports Ms Ziervogel, who speaks Arabic. “A creative writing workshop is absolutely normal in most places, and that normality was what we wanted—to hear from them not as victims, but in describing their real lives.” The editors were stunned by the strength of the writing that emerged. “The quality was the most amazing thing,” says Ms Helal. “That was so surprising, to get a really good structured story from someone who has never picked up a pen and paper.” And much to the participants’ delight, the outcome—for writers and readers alike—is a sense not of hopelessness, but hope. Strands of the story encapsulate “the positive sides of this upheaval which we didn’t see at first,” Ms Ziervogel says. There is a sense of community and new opportunities, especially for women, in the camp. For the participants, the act of writing has been transformational. “For the first time we were given the opportunity to talk about ourselves, our sadness, our joys, and our traditions,” said Rayan Mohammad Sukkar, aged 22, a Palestinian Lebanese born in the Shatila camp. (The writers, unable to work in Lebanon or obtain visas to visit Britain, spoke at the novel’s launch via a video produced at the camp.) “This project freed up a lot of energy in me and enabled me to tell honest stories,” agreed Omar Khaled Ahmad, a 19-year-old Palestinian Syrian who fled Damascus in 2013. “I needed someone to show me how to convey my feelings and how to talk about things that have happened to me.” “It was a very beautiful experience,” says Safa Khaled Algarbahwi, a Syrian who arrived at Shatila in 2013. In the video she puts a hand to her heart and speaks directly to the editors. “We are so proud of our achievement, and proud of you. You were able to help us reveal something hidden inside us, in our hearts.” At a time when publishers increasingly recognise the predominance of white middle-class voices in contemporary fiction, “Shatila Stories” offers a template for encouraging writers from other backgrounds. Khaled Hosseini, an Afghan-American writer, called the novel “remarkable”, noting that “It isn’t about the refugee voice: it is born from it, and told through it.” “Shatila Stories” offers a rare glimpse into the daily struggles of millions of displaced people; its unique, collaborative approach gives authentic voice to these refugees and their lives. “Who looks outside, dreams; who looks inside, awakes,” Carl Jung, a psychologist, once said. Understanding existence through stories is one of humanity’s deepest drives—whether that existence is one of ease and comfort, or of hardship in a refugee camp.