STEVE BALLMER, Microsoft’s former chief executive, became an internet meme when he gave a speech to employees in which he bounced across the stage shouting “developers” over a dozen times. While much has changed since Mr Ballmer’s chant, developers remain central to Microsoft’s strategy. Earlier this month his successor, Satya Nadella, announced that Microsoft would acquire GitHub, a platform for hosting software code—especially “open-source” projects—for $7.5bn. Developers took to the internet in outrage, predicting a slow death for the service. Many non-coders, meanwhile, were left wondering what all the fuss was about. What is GitHub, and why do developers care so much about it? GitHub is designed around Git, a system for tracking changes in software code. Git was originally created by Linus Torvalds, a Finnish-American software engineer, to track changes in Linux, an open-source rival to Windows that he designed. Unlike the previous generation of version-control software, Git was designed to track software written by a large, disparate group, rather than by a managed team at a software company. It allows multiple developers to work on the same code in different places, and to integrate their changes later. But whereas Git makes such collaboration possible, it hardly makes it easy. To work out just what another developer has changed requires users to enter arcane directives at a command prompt and scroll through pages of text. GitHub aimed to solve that problem. It stores the source code of software projects, alongside places for discussions and materials about the project. Most important, though, are “pull requests”, a way for developers to submit changes to a project. Pull requests package up changes neatly for other developers to read and review. They can host comments and discussions on individual lines of code, and allow developers to tweak and perfect their changes until they are ready to incorporate into the project. Pull requests made it easy for developers to contribute to open-source projects, even if they didn’t know the people who wrote the original software. Managed teams adopted it, too: the pull request has become the basic unit of work for millions of developers. GitHub is now the de facto home of open-source software. But Microsoft’s acquisition reignited a debate over the platform’s centrality. Microsoft assures users the service is safe under its stewardship, but many are wary. When Mr Ballmer spoke of developers, he had a specific sort in mind: those using Microsoft’s tools to build projects for Microsoft products. He once called open-source Linux a “cancer”, which would spread uncontrollably. In a sense, his words proved prophetic: today, open-source software is everywhere, from websites to financial markets to self-driving cars. Under Mr Nadella’s leadership, Microsoft has embraced open-source development. In buying GitHub it hopes to gain the trust of developers it once spurned. But some wonder if the change is complete, or if Microsoft will use its newly bought dominance of open-source hosting to push its own products. Alternatives to GitHub—some themselves open-source—wait in the wings. If it is not careful, Microsoft may find the developers it just paid so much to reach slipping from its grasp.