ON JUNE 5th Miss America announced that it would ditch the bikinis and become a “competition”, rather than a pageant. “We will no longer judge our candidates on their outward physical appearance,” announced Gretchen Carlson (pictured), the chairwoman of Miss America’s board of directors, and a former Miss America (1989). “That’s huge.” On Twitter the organisation posted a brief video of a white bikini disappearing in a puff of smoke with the hashtag #byebyebikini. This begs more questions than it answers. Ever since the pageant was launched in 1921, with the aim of finding “The Most Beautiful Bathing Girl in America”, its winners have been united by nothing except their physical attractiveness. If that no longer matters then what does? Ms Carlson’s response to this was unclear. What woman, she asked, in defence of the post-beauty pageant, “doesn’t want to be empowered, learn leadership skills, and pay for college, and be able to show the world who you are as a person from the inside of your soul?” Miss America’s explanatory statement offered more of the same. In place of the bikini parade, a contestant in Miss America 2.0, as the show is to be called, will “take part in a live interactive session with the judges, where she will highlight her achievements and goals in life and how she will use her talents, passion, and ambition to perform the job of Miss America”. The old evening-gown competition, in which contestants paraded in slinky evening dresses, will be dropped for an event in which contestants wear “evening attire of their choosing while discussing how they will advance their social media initiatives”. This change was prompted by the #MeToo movement, in which Ms Carlson has played a lead part. In 2016 she sued Roger Ailes, then chairman of Fox News, for sexual harassment, which led to his downfall. In January she was appointed to head the board of the Miss America Organisation after it was tainted by an unpleasant scandal: the organisation’s former chief executive, among other employees, was alleged to have made nasty and misogynistic comments about former contestants. The announcement of a new, more enlightened Miss America is an attempt to get away from all that. “Miss America is proud to evolve as an organisation and join this empowerment movement,” Ms Carlson said. Yet still the question remains: what is the point of an empowered Miss America, if that really is what the organisers have in mind? It may no longer be acceptable to have young women parade in bikinis, but the appeal of that spectacle is at least comprehensible. Launched to attract tourists to Atlantic City, New Jersey, during Labour Day weekend, the pageant has latterly relied on a heavily-male television audience, though its viewership has declined in recent years. Are there as many viewers who want to watch a bunch of random young women talking about Snapchat? Probably not. Which is why Miss America 2.0 will retain just enough of its old format to keep viewers happy. Ms Carlson said she wasn’t worried that fewer people would tune in without the bikinis because people liked the “talent” stage of the contest. This traditionally involves the contestants showing off skills that have included tap-dancing and baton-twirling, while skimpily dressed. This may not sound like great viewing. But it is all Miss America, an outworn relic of a very different America, has left.