ON JUNE 24TH, for the first time in their country’s history, Turks will head to the polls to elect both parliament and president on the same day. The vote, which will take place under a state of emergency now entering its third year, has been billed as the most important in decades. But does the opposition stand a chance against Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and his Justice and Development (AK) party? No one has ever made any money by betting against Mr Erdogan. As prime minister since 2003 and as president since 2014, he has won 12 elections and referendums. This time around, however, the Turkish leader faces a disciplined and increasingly galvanised opposition. Having learned from the previous presidential election, in which it fielded a meek conservative unable to take the fight to Mr Erdogan, the main opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP) has produced Muharrem Ince, a charismatic campaigner. The other contenders include Meral Aksener, whose newly hatched Iyi (Good) party has peeled off scores of nationalist voters from the president’s camp, and Selahattin Demirtas, a Kurdish politician imprisoned since 2016 on hopelessly vague terror charges. Three months ago, when he called early elections, Mr Erdogan seemed practically assured of a resounding win. Today, Mr Ince’s growing popularity and Mr Erdogan’s surprisingly weak campaign mean an upset is no longer inconceivable. Mr Ince would have a chance if he can force Mr Erodgan into a runoff and then inherit practically all the voters of Mrs Aksener and Mr Demirtas. But that will not be easy. And then there is parliament. To improve its chances of retaining the majority it has held almost uninterruptedly for 15 years, AK entered into an electoral pact, dubbed the People’s Alliance, with the MHP, a hardline nationalist party. In exchange for supporting AK’s agenda, the nationalists will be able to sidestep the country’s 10% electoral threshold, the minimum vote share needed for a party to enter parliament. But the move has also helped unite the previously disorganised opposition. Four parties, including the CHP and Iyi, but not the pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP), have forged a pact of their own. The four have been polling at a combined 40% or so of the vote. But everything depends on the HDP and its voters. Assuming the HDP wins at least 10% (and so can enter parliament), the forces aligned against the People’s Alliance could deny it a majority. Assuming it falls short, Mr Erdogan and his allies would retain control of the assembly, since AK usually comes second in HDP-voting districts, and would win all its seats. The stakes could not be much higher. The opposition has turned the election into a second referendum on constitutional amendments that would dismantle the country’s parliamentary democracy and place all executive power in Mr Erdogan’s hands. In the first one, held last year and marred by allegations of vote rigging, voters endorsed the changes by a thin margin. A double win for Mr Erdogan and AK would complete the transformation into a one-man regime. A double defeat, hard as it might be to imagine, would mean the end of the Erdogan era, plus a resounding collapse of a system of patronage that has spread its tentacles across the economy and the media. The most likely outcome—a win for Mr Erdogan in the presidential contest and for the opposition in the parliamentary vote—would probably provoke political gridlock, and perhaps yet another early election. More turbulence can be expected.