ON JUNE 26th, after months of legal wrangling over Donald Trump’s executive orders banning travel from several Muslim-majority countries, the Supreme Court effectively put an end to the battle. Officially, the five-justice majority’s opinion in Trump v Hawaii, which upholds the third version of the travel ban, sends the matter back to lower courts to ask again whether Mr Trump’s policy violates a constitutional bar on religious discrimination. But it is unlikely that further scrutiny will yield a different result. The most recent proclamation, from September 2017, fulfilling the president’s campaign promise to keep Muslims out of America is consistent, Chief Justice John Roberts wrote, with both immigration law and the First Amendment. The Supreme Court traditionally defers to presidents in matters of immigration and national security, and Chief Justice Roberts left no doubt, early in his opinion, that nothing about Donald Trump changes that. The Immigration and Nationality Act, a law Congress passed in 1965, “exudes deference to the president in every clause”. It “entrusts to the president...whether and when to suspend entry” to the country, “whose entry to suspend” and “on what conditions”. Mr Trump’s proclamation limiting travel from Chad (which was later removed from the list), Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Syria, Venezuela and Yemen “falls well within this comprehensive delegation”. It was promulgated “to protect national security and public safety”, Chief Justice Roberts wrote, and fits squarely within the realm of authority Congress affords presidents. There is little reason to think the First Amendment constrains Mr Trump either, the chief wrote. Plaintiffs opposing the travel ban may claim the president’s proclamation targets “Muslim-majority populations” and that the results of the administration’s worldwide review were “foreordained”, but there is insufficient evidence that “religious animus” played a part the executive actions. Yes, Mr Trump, as a candidate, may have called for a “total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country’s representatives can figure out what is going on”. And he may have said that “Islam hates us” and claimed America was “having problems with Muslims coming into the country”. Those sentiments may not be the finest presidential messages in America’s history, Chief Justice Roberts wrote, and may not compare favourably to those of presidents like George Washington, Dwight Eisenhower and George W. Bush who “espouse[d] the principles of religious freedom and tolerance on which this nation was founded”. But America’s chief executives have at times “performed unevenly in living up to those inspiring words”. The Supreme Court's job is “not whether to denounce the statements”; it is to consider “the authority of the presidency itself”. Following this gentle rebuke of the sitting president, Chief Justice Roberts held up the lowest of constitutional bars for Mr Trump’s policy to clear: so-called “rational-basis review”, by which the justices ask whether any conceivable justification underlies the travel ban. The nature of the question suggests the court’s answer. Since “the entry suspension has a legitimate grounding in national security concerns, quite apart from any religious hostility”, the court is obliged to “accept that independent justification”. Dissenting opinions from Justice Sonia Sotomayor (joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg) and Justice Stephen Breyer (joined by Justice Elena Kagan) rejected this weak test of Mr Trump’s travel restrictions. While Justice Breyer focused on what appears to be a failure to implement the proclamation’s waivers for travellers who meet certain qualifications—such as “a child with cerebral palsy in Yemen” whose life was at stake yet had her visa waiver application denied—Justice Sotomayor embarked on a full-throated, 28-page condemnation of the majority’s stance. Pointing to several precedents barring the government from targeting people by religion, Justice Sotomayor criticised the court for “fail[ing] to safeguard” America’s “fundamental principle” of religious liberty. By giving its stamp of approval to a policy that inflicts “pain and suffering” upon “countless families and individuals, many of whom are United States citizens”, the court has fallen down on the job. It has even “throw[n] the Establishment Clause”—the provision of the First Amendment barring religious discrimination—“out the window”. Comparing Trump v Hawaii to Korematsu v United States, the roundly discredited ruling that justified the internment of Japanese Americans in the second world war, Justice Sotomayor ended with a flourish. “Our constitution demands, and our country deserves”, she wrote, “a judiciary willing to hold the coordinate branches to account when they defy our most sacred legal commitments”.