IN NOVEMBER, as they do every two years, Americans will go to the polls to elect a new Congress. The Republicans enjoy majorities in both chambers and a president who is usually sympathetic to their agenda, but the current Congress has been long on drama, with some unexpectedly tight votes. Major legislative initiatives, such as health-care reform, have failed; even a tax-cut measure passed by only a handful of votes. The Democrats, buoyed by energetic opposition to Donald Trump’s presidency, will believe they can win control of one or both chambers. Republicans will hope that a strong economy and a low unemployment rate will help them hold on. What will determine the winner? The two-chamber structure of Congress is the result of an 18th-century dispute that occurred when the first of the states agreed to unite. Big states wanted population to determine seats in the legislature; small states preferred equal votes for each state, regardless of size. The founders did both. In the House of Representatives states get seats in accordance with their population. In the Senate, each state has two senators serving six-year terms. All 435 members of the House stand for election every two years, to keep them dependent on and sympathetic with the people. Only a third of senators, on the contrary, stand for election at any given time, so the Senate tends to change more slowly: it was intended as a moderating influence in government. The Democrats (and their independent allies) need just two more seats to win a majority in the Senate come November, and 25 seats to win control of the House. Yet though the Democrats might seem closer to winning the Senate, they are in truth on shakier ground there. Of 35 Senate seats up for grabs this year, 26 are already held by the Democrats or their allies. Ten of those 26 represent states that voted for Mr Trump in 2016. Gaining another two seats will be tricky. In the House, too, Republicans have an advantage. Because Democrats tend to live in compact, heavily Democratic areas and  because Republicans have been more successful at gerrymandering, the House is tilted in their favour. Democrats will have to win 5m-6m more votes than Republicans to gain a House majority, according to our statistical model of the House election. Still the Republicans are on the back foot. Their representatives have opted to retire in unusually high numbers, among them Paul Ryan, the Speaker of the House. Democrats have done well in special elections—those held to fill vacancies that arise during a term—and lead strongly in polling. Based on these and other factors, our model rates the Democrats as narrow favourites to gain control of the House. Even if Republicans keep control of the House they are likely to lose seats, and a smaller majority will make laws harder to pass. Should they lose either chamber it could force cross-party compromise, but more probably will prevent all but the most anodyne or most essential laws being passed. Moreover, with control of either chamber, Democrats could conduct formal investigations of Mr Trump and his administration over his business dealings or alleged co-ordination with Russia. Democrats, unable to get major legislation past the president’s veto, might content themselves with hearings and summons that tie up the Trump administration for months. (Democratic leaders, though, have downplayed the prospect of impeachment.) In addition, since the Senate must approve the president’s nominees to cabinet and federal judgeships, Democratic control could severely limit his choices. Though Mr Trump himself will not be on the ballot, these elections will define the next phase of his presidency.