HALFWAY through the weightlifting competition at the Commonwealth games in Australia in April, the Rwandan coach, Jean Paul Nsengiyumva, excused himself to go to the bathroom. He never came back. Mr Nsengiyumva was one of 250-odd competitors and support staff to have disappeared over the course of the games. Cameroon (the team pictured) lost a third of its delegation in three night-time absconsions. Peter Dutton, the conservative minister in charge of Australia’s crackdown against asylum-seekers, said that he would find those remaining in the country illegally and “lock them in a local watch house”. But organisers did not seem surprised. “It happens at every games,” shrugged Peter Beattie, who chaired the organising committee. Athletes have long used competitions as an opportunity to escape war, poverty or repressive dictatorships, either by lodging claims for asylum or by disappearing altogether. Competitors and coaches have stayed behind at almost every Olympics since the second world war. Almost half of Hungary’s 100-strong delegation defected at the Melbourne Olympics of 1956, shortly after Soviet forces had quashed a revolution in their country. Some 145 athletes missed their outbound flights after the Sydney Olympics at the turn of this century too. And when Australia hosted the Commonwealth games in 2006, at least 40 participants stayed behind. Countries including Cuba and North Korea have been known to keep their athletes under surveillance to avoid losing entire teams. The recent disappearances are substantial even by the standards of this long tradition. Immigration officials told senators that roughly 190 of the absconding athletes have applied for asylum, with a handful more seeking other visas. That leaves 50-odd in the country illegally. Their numbers pale in comparison, however, to the thousands of asylum-seekers who arrive in Australia by other means each year. Few have made it in by sea since politicians resumed a bipartisan policy of putting “boat people” into detention centres on Pacific islands in 2013. But between 2015 and 2016 more than 9,500 individuals entered the country on valid visas—as tourists or business travellers, for example—and then stayed to lodge asylum claims. Much like the sports stars, some use religious gatherings or international conferences as opportunities to do so. Australia’s conservative coalition government likes to keep a stranglehold on its borders. Mr Dutton, an immigration hardliner who recently offered asylum to white farmers from South Africa, warned disappearing athletes that they “aren’t going to game the system”. Yet with many hailing from poor or conflict-ridden African nations such as Sierra Leone and Cameroon, refugee agencies point out that they have every right to seek asylum in Australia. Rich countries are often wary of granting visas to visitors from such places, precisely because they might abscond. Yet all 14 athletes who left Sierra Leone’s Commonwealth team in 2006 were granted asylum in Australia. The most recent games-related asylum applications are already being processed. Those deemed to be refugees will be allowed to stay. Some might even join past defectors in competing for Australia.