IT WILL go down as one of the greatest upsets in World Cup history. On June 27th Germany exited the tournament at the group stage, marking the first time that the country had failed to reach the quarter-finals since 1938. The debacle was all the more astounding for its farcical conclusion. The reigning world champions lost 2-0 to a South Korean side that had already been eliminated, and which delivered the knockout blow when the German goalkeeper ventured into the opposition half, leaving his goal wide open. Fans around the world reacted with equal measures of shock and Schadenfreude as Germany finished bottom of the group, so familiar were they with Die Mannschaft’s inevitable procession to the tournament’s final week. Before this summer’s edition kicked off, The Economist published a statistical analysis of the sporting and economic factors that have historically allowed countries to excel on the football pitch. We found that Germany ought to dominate all others, given its wealth, passion for the game and excellent grassroots organisation. We also identified it as a paragon of how to overhaul a failing youth system. Between 1990 and 2005 Germany underachieved relative to our model’s expectations by about a third of a goal per game. So its clubs and national football association invested in a massive revamp of the academy system, spending at least €1bn ($1.2bn) since 2001, and vastly increasing the quantity and quality of coaching for youngsters. The national team has performed roughly in line with our model’s very high expectations since 2006, culminating in World Cup glory four years ago. What went wrong? There are two obvious explanations: a dwindling stock of world-class players and their poor organisation on the field. Start with the players. Though many football statisticians have created player-rating systems, most of them have been devised since the last World Cup. A less objective method—but one that has proved insightful when tracking other national declines, such as that of Italy—is to examine votes for the Ballon d’Or, an annual vote by journalists for the world’s best player. Five Germans were shortlisted in 2013, and six in 2014; but only three in 2015 and 2016, and just two last year. The quality of the Bundesliga also seems to have dwindled. Four years ago German teams occupied four of the top 25 spots in Europe according to ClubElo.com, a website that rates sides using the Elo formula. Today, there is only one: Bayern Munich. Yet even with that decline, Germany still had a remarkably talented squad. 21st Club, a football consultancy, reckoned that its roster was the second-strongest at the World Cup. The greater problem seemed to be turning the players into an effective team. Germany’s form coming into the competition was dismal, with just one win in six matches: a narrow 2-1 victory against a weak Saudi Arabia. Indeed, on the eve of the tournament most forecasters were far less confident about Germany’s chances than the betting markets. Gamblers on Betfair’s exchange reckoned the reigning champions had a 16% chance of retaining their title. However, Gracenote Sports, an analytics company that produced forecasts based on teams' performances, gave them just 8%. 21st Club’s team-based prediction was just 5%, rising to 10% when including player strength. Goldman Sachs, which also included player measurements, had Germany at 11%, with FiveThirtyEight, a statistics website using a similar methodology, the most generous at 13%. In every case, the boffins were more bearish than the bettors. Perhaps the gamblers were pricing in Germany’s much-fabled composure under pressure, derived largely from a strong record in penalty shoot-outs. Alas, most of the evidence suggests that penalty-taking is random, and that the Germans have probably been a bit lucky. Besides, the current crop are mediocre from the spot. Thomas Müller, Germany’s most experienced taker, has converted 79% of his career attempts, which is a hair over the average in major leagues. The average rate for his team’s other attacking options—Marco Reus, Timo Werner, Mario Gómez and Mesut Özil—is 74%. In the end, Die Mannschaft got nowhere near a shoot-out. The same deficiencies that the forecasters had detected before the tournament showed up almost immediately. The Germans played with similar tactics to the ones they used in 2014: dominating possession with short passes in the opposition half, and holding a high defensive line. But unlike four years ago, the team lacked a robust defensive presence in midfield. Philipp Lahm, a wing-back who had converted into a holding midfielder, retired in 2014. Sami Khedira, who hoovered up loose passes four years ago, looked weary this time around. That left the team exposed to counter-attacks, a weakness that Mexico, Sweden and South Korea cunningly exploited. Of the four goals that Germany conceded, three came from mistakes in midfield that allowed the opposition to break quickly through the unprotected defence. At the other end of the pitch, Germany’s attackers proved fruitless. Though they had the majority of possession, they struggled to break down three organised defences. They took 72 shots, more than any other team in the tournament, but mostly from speculative positions. Expected goals, a statistic that estimates how many goals a team should score given the quality of its chances, reckoned they should have found the net four times. That is two more than they actually mustered, but still as many as they conceded. Mr Werner, the 22-year-old striker leading the attack, looked particularly out of his depth, managing just seven attempts on goal. It would be easy to blame Germany’s inability to create scoring opportunities on a lack of cohesion. In each combination of four forwards that Joachim Low, the coach, selected in the three matches, none of the quartet had played together at club level. By contrast, in 2014 he selected the same attacking quartet in the last three knockout matches, three of whom had played for Bayern Munich. Football analysts have found that, in domestic leagues at least, consistency in selection does not seem to improve a team’s future performance. But it is possible that international teams, which get only a few weeks to practice each year, may benefit from having more shared experience between players. Goliath beats David For many onlookers, Germany’s departure at the group stage proved that this World Cup has been particularly unpredictable. The reigning champions were far from the only highly rated side to look sluggish. Argentina scraped through to the next round with a late winner against Nigeria, having drawn to Iceland. Spain needed an injury-time equalizer against Morocco to secure qualification, while Portugal drew with Iran. Until the 90th minute of a game against Costa Rica, Brazil looked on course to draw its first two matches. Yet the draw for the knockout rounds tells a very different story. Only two teams from outside of Europe and South America have qualified, the lowest figure in 20 years. No African side will feature, for the first time since the round-of-16 was introduced in 1986. Of the 16 teams that the forecasters thought were most likely to progress, 14 did. Only Germany and Poland failed (Gracenote also picked Peru as a probable candidate, ahead of eventual qualifiers Denmark). Gracenote, 21st Club and Goldman Sachs each gave Germany at least a one-in-five chance of exiting at the group stage. Overall, the uncertainty in their predictions suggested that four or five of the most fancied qualifiers would normally be packing their bags after the second week. Indeed, in 2014 there were four major casualties before the round-of-16: Portugal, England, Italy and Spain. The Germans are the fourth of the last five reigning champions to suffer such a calamity. That no other footballing powerhouse has joined them will be little consolation for the country’s grieving fans.