This is the introduction to a two-week, ten-part series of essays on transgender identities. FROM the transgender bathroom debate in America to the argument in Britain over who can stand for election on women-only shortlists, a row about transgender identities is generating more heat than light. On one hand are some transgender people and activists, who advocate for “gender self-identification”: the belief that the world should take at face value a person’s declaration of their own gender identity. On the other are people who assert the primacy of biological sex; who fear the erosion of protections for women, including from male violence; or who see gender as a pernicious class system that maintains male supremacy and would like it done away entirely. The row pits one historically oppressed group against another. It strikes at some very modern dilemmas: the usefulness of identity politics; the accommodations that should be made for small subgroups; how to work towards inclusion without triggering a backlash. Further heightening tensions, many countries are considering changing the way someone can legally change gender from a process mediated by medical professionals to one of gender self-identification, and a few have already done so. On July 3rd Britain launched a public consultation on this issue: under government proposals, a simple statutory declaration would suffice to change your legal gender, and enable you to change the sex stated on your birth certificate and other official records. To coincide with the consultation, The Economist is hosting a series of essays from a range of people with interesting and varied viewpoints, insights and arguments on transgender identities. The series will run over two weeks, with two or three essays published each day in the first week, and further comments and discussion between our participants published next week. On July 13th I will wrap up the event, drawing out the points that most struck me from the essays, and from readers’ comments. This online event is part of The Economist’s Open Future project, which aims to remake the case for liberalism today. One of the liberal values we seek to uphold is open debate. When it comes to transgender issues, and gender self-identification in particular, positions have become entrenched. Debate has become polarised, toxic and unilluminating. We hope our event will help to change that. In the interests of fostering open debate we have set ground rules, both for essays and reader comments: use the pronouns people want you to use, and avoid all slurs, including TERF (trans-exclusionary radical feminist), which may have started as a descriptive term but is now used to try to silence a vast swathe of opinions on trans issues, and sometimes to incite violence against women. Comments will be open but closely moderated. We are grateful to our contributors, who have agreed with grace and good humour to step onto this contested ground. We hope they will all find the fortnight interesting and perhaps even illuminating. We have enormously enjoyed reading their thoughts, and have already learned a great deal. The series started on July 3rd with three viewpoints on gender self-identification: Vic Valentine argued for the British government’s proposals on gender self-identification and thinks that, if anything, they should go further; and Debbie Hayton and Kristina Harrison recognised the need for reform but argue against a system of self-declaration. Today we continue with two essays on lesbian identity. Charlie Kiss argues that the myth that trans men are just “lesbians in denial” is demeaning and wrong. Pippa Fleming believes that the idea of gender fluidity erases lesbian identity. Previous articles in The Economist on transgender issues: “Making sense of the culture war over transgender identity,” November 16th 2017. “Children are victims in the latest identity-driven culture war,” Leader, November 16th 2017