WHEN starting a new column, it is nice to get a topic that is at the heart of your chosen field. And David Graeber's book “Bullshit Jobs: A Theory” certainly centres around the issues of managment and work. My analysis of his underyling thesis—that lots of socially useless and boring jobs have been created in recent decades—can be found in the print column. (Here also is a link to the original Economist piece that created “Parkinson’s Law”.) To summarise the column, some of the phenomena he notices are not new and his explanations for the apparent rise of pointless activity do not seem convincing. But another idea discussed in the book is that there is an inverse relationship between the social benefits of a job and the level of compensation. Is that right? Perhaps he is thinking of nurses or ambulance drivers. But it is not true of all life-saving jobs. Top surgeons, for example, are very well paid. Both policemen and firemen earn more than the average salary for men in America. But let us suppose that Mr Graeber could prove his thesis with some kind of statistical analysis that ranks social usefulness on one scale and pay on another. (Not that he attempts to do that; it’s not that kind of book.) What would be the explanation? He goes back into history to suggest that work, and education, are both a process of learning self-discipline and how to behave like an adult. He refers to the paradox whereby And suggests that There must be something to this, although I think he underestimates the extent to which any job imposes constraints that chafe. Even film stars get bored by endless retakes and sports stars dislike training. But he leaps to the conclusion that factory workers are poorly paid This can’t be right. If envy were the crucial criterion, we would underpay rock stars (think Dire Straits: “That ain’t workin’; that’s the way you do it”). Nurses and others are poorly paid because plenty of people have a combination of the educational requirements and the caring attitude required for the job. But one doesn’t get the impression that nurses are envied; dealing with the infirm and elderly, and the anti-social hours, must be hard work. And let us imagine a country in which nurses were paid the same salaries as chief executives of S&P 500 companies, and chief executives were paid like today’s nurses. Taxes (or insurance premiums in America) would be very high in order to pay such wages, and talented executives would head for other countries where they would be paid a lot better. The economic outlook would deteriorate fast. A final point. Having said that Mr Graeber does not use many statistics, at one stage he includes a graph that shows productivity outpacing average hourly compensation in the last 40 years, to illustrate that workers were not gaining the full benefits of their efforts. Some of this went to executive bonuses, he says. But then he adds that But how does that make sense? Productivity is measured as output per worker. Managers and administrative staff are included in those statistics. So if companies have employed lots of useless workers, productivity would not have improved at all. His explanation for this point is, one might even say, bullshit.