Numbers are important when discussing and managing migration. Information on the speed and scale of migration helps governments make plans: they can make sure that there are enough people to assess prospective asylum claims and enough school places for the children of new arrivals. The data also help the public understand migration within a rapidly changing environment. Citizens consistently overestimate the proportion of non-nationals living in their country and underestimate their contribution to workforces, communities and overall demographics. Counteracting such misconceptions with facts makes for good public policy. Yet although the political debate on migration in Europe has been all about numbers in recent years, this is not how they have been used. Rather than data being used as a means to improve the quality of policies, the crude volume of migrants, whether entering or departing, has become a metric for success. “Getting the numbers down” is now a mantra for policymakers across Europe. Though this may reassure citizens in the short term, committing to such an objective creates its own problems. The use of numerical targets with little contextual or practical relevance has detached the promises of politicians from accountability for their actions and divorced public debate from the more tangible impacts of migration, positive and negative. Few politicians are punished for making fantastical promises since voters no longer expect them to be kept. But the mere pursuit of the goal can cause great harm. The British government’s promise to reduce net immigration to 100,000 per year, first floated by the Conservative government in the run-up to the 2010 election, is the most frequently cited example. It has endured, and remained popular as an idea, despite the fact that neither experts nor the public believe it to be actually attainable. Among other adverse effects, it has led to a shortage of skilled labour (including in health care). Despite the rhetoric, the government has never come close to reaching the target. As politicians have become hooked on this approach, the commitments have become more outlandish. Matteo Salvini, Italy’s newly installed interior minister, immediately declared his intention to return 500,000 unauthorised migrants he claims reside in the country. Even identifying them is beyond the grasp of the current bureaucracy. Returning them would require robust co-operation from the migrants’ home countries, which they are often unwilling to give. The commitment also ignores the reality of the shadow economy in Italy: unauthorised migrants are the backbone of a number of industries, from agriculture to health care. The distortion of particular policy goals to meet targets can have disproportionate effects on other areas of public policy. Migration concerns have warped foreign policies, with European leaders self-censoring criticism of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president of Turkey, for fear of jeopardising a deal the EU struck with his government to manage migration flows, and skating over UN concerns that intervention in Libya to reduce smuggling will have a negative effect on its long-term stability. More importantly, the drive to meet a manufactured goal is eroding the function of core tenets of good governance: applying rules in a consistent, predictable and transparent manner. Instead, governments are tilting towards policies that may involve capricious, arbitrary rules or have disproportionate effects on broader public policy goals. The near-neurotic fear of increasing arrivals of irregular migrants has led governments to propose ever more draconian, and unsustainable, enforcement policies. The creation of “container camps” at the Hungarian-Serbian border is one of the more extreme examples of this philosophy of decreasing volume at all cost. The border force restricts flows of potential asylum-seekers to 20 per day. Once across, claimants are kept in unsanitary conditions and offered no means to leave the camp, except back to Serbia. This is also having a broader effect on the political landscape. The battle over numbers is binary—let in more or let in fewer—and unwinnable for liberals, as arguing for more immigration has now become a poisoned chalice in almost every part of Europe. But the opposite position is also hard to sustain. In search of a mythical “zero”, opposition parties find themselves caught in a spiralling narrative of ever stricter policy set by harder-line counterparts. Faced with this false choice, a competition for extreme policies has emerged. For example, in Denmark, the centre-left Social Democrats have co-opted a number of more typically conservative ideas, such as the external processing of asylum claims, and linking future intake of refugees to integration outcomes, in an effort to match and outdo the already strict policies of the incumbent government. Neither of these policies is practically implementable, and both are legally questionable. And the incumbent government has pushed itself one step further: proposing the creation of deportation camps for failed asylum-seekers in non-EU countries. Immigration laws can be tough and narrowly framed. Indeed, within the rules of international law, they have every right to be. But to be sustainable, they must also be well resourced, with a clear process that is consistently and transparently applied. They must also have clear limits on what governments should and should not be able to do, to avoid a state abusing them. The overwhelming focus on numbers has substituted for the real policy objectives, and concerns, that underlie immigration systems. Concerns over irregular arrivals speak more to a fear of chaos and lack of control than volume, yet European governments have settled on the border as the sole means of control. Politicians rarely discuss policies to address the illegal employment and exploitation of migrants in the shadow economy, even though that might have more real impact on people’s lives. While using numbers can be useful for planning, they fail when they are used as a proxy for control. It is impossible to pursue a comprehensive immigration policy by articulating superficial goals. Numbers may be an indicator of success, but they fail as its sole determinant. ___________ Elizabeth Collett is the director of Migration Policy Institute Europe.