FOR many regular travellers—or at least those without access to fast-track security lanes—it has become a fact of life. When you pass through airport security, you have to load your carry-on bag onto the x-ray belt, and take out your liquids and large electronic items. But within a matter of years, this tedious exercise might be a thing of the past.  This summer America’s Transportation Security Administration (TSA) is testing in 15 airports new x-ray machines that can detect explosives without the need to remove liquids and electronics from bags. Flyers passing through the security lines with those machines can simply place their bags on the belt and walk through the scanner. The TSA hopes to have 40 units in place by the end of the year and more than 145 by the end of September next year. “We think in perhaps five years or so, the passengers won’t have to take anything out of their carry-on bags,” David Pekoske of the TSA told CBS, a broadcaster. According to CBS, the TSA would need about 2,000 machines to cover all of the country’s airport security checkpoints. It is not just America. The same type of CT scanner, which works like a hospital scanner and produces 3D images, is being tested in Britain. Heathrow airport, in London, is reportedly running a small number of trials with this scanner over the next 6 to 12 months, and the Department for Transport says that if the trials are successful, “this could lead in future to passengers no longer needing to remove items from hand luggage for screening.” Luton airport, just north of London, tested a similar scanner last year and shared its results with the department. These scanners have also been tested at Amsterdam’s Schipol airport, and they are being used on checked bags at a number of airports. The current American and British regulations require flyers to place all liquids under 100ml—larger liquid containers are not allowed—into a sealed plastic bag. But here is where the new machines could serve their best purpose. Flyers want to feel like their safety is being protected. Generally, new procedures and equipment that create the illusion of safety also create longer security lines. So even if the new scanners do not make flying meaningfully safer, anything that lends the appearance of safety without slowing things down—and the scanners are actually likely to speed things up—is most welcome.