IN HIS controversial book “War is Beautiful” (2015), David Shields took aim at the New York Times. He wrote that the newspaper’s photographic coverage of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq both “enchanted and infuriated” him, arguing that many of the photos aestheticised violence and distanced readers from the reality of the conflicts. “It seems like an institutional policy to choose pictures that you could hang on your living room wall,” Mr Shields wrote. “Journalism is supposed to afflict the comfortable and comfort the afflicted. The Times does neither.” It is the role of photojournalists to document events, and to do so in a striking way; the New York Times is hardly alone in wanting to run arresting images on its front page. Bearing witness and creating something of aesthetic value are not mutually exclusive—as the work of Robert Capa and Tim Page proves—but a certain tension often exists between them. This tension has been highlighted by the World Press Photo Awards, which since 1955 have sought to prize images that apply “an outstanding level of visual perception and creativity” to “an issue, situation or event of great journalistic importance”. Each year the winning entries form an exhibition, visited by around 4m people in some 100 cities. Blown up and hung on gallery walls, abstracted from the news stories they helped to tell, the photos are invariably experienced as art above all else. It increasingly seems that the photographers are approaching their work with this emphasis in mind. This year Kevin Frayer’s images of Rohingya refugees—like Joel Goodman’s much-shared snap from 2015 of a boozy New Year’s Eve in Manchester—might well be compared to Renaissance paintings. Taken in black and white, one shows the outstretched, pointing finger of a woman being helped from a boat onto Bangladeshi territory. With its emphasis on this particular gesture and the bodies of the subjects, the image seems less an exploration of Myanmar’s attempts at ethnic cleansing than a reference to a religious artwork. So too, Adam Ferguson’s portraits of young girls in Nigeria who have escaped Boko Haram (pictured above), an Islamist group, would seem more appropriate on a collector’s wall than in the editorial pages. The subjects are veiled, pictured in front of backlit curtains that bring to mind Mark Rothko’s colour-field paintings. Daniel Beltra’s images of deforestation in the Amazon, most notably his wonderful shot of scarlet ibises flying above flooded lowlands (pictured below), at once both elevate and somehow reduce environmental disaster to the status of abstract expressionism. The stories behind the pictures are overshadowed by the visual impact of the pictures themselves. This year’s winning entry depicts a young man on fire in the midst of protests against President Nicolás Maduro in Caracas, Venezuela (pictured, top). Ronaldo Schemidt, a local photographer, captured the image moments before the blaze—caused by a motorcycle engine explosion—was extinguished (remarkably, the man survived with first- and second-degree burns). The agony is conveyed with technical mastery. The photo is perfectly framed: behind the burning man is an image of a gun, pointing towards graffiti of the word “Paz” (“Peace”). The colours are vibrant and the focus just soft enough to give it an otherworldly quality. Yet the fact that the picture was taken at a particular moment in Venezuelan history seems to be neither here nor there. The burning man, José Víctor Salazar Balza, may as well be the burning man of Spike Jonze’s famous music video for Wax’s “Southern California”: anonymous, abstract, an example of pure aesthetics. The talent of Mr Schemidt, or indeed any of this year’s crop of photographers, is not in question. But away from the newspaper or the magazine, the viewer’s relationship to their work is inevitably altered. This begs a series of related questions. What, exactly, are the World Press judges looking for? What do readers want or expect from news photographs? If the answer is art, what responsibilities accrue to the photographer tasked with turning the news of the day into it? At the very least, a balance must be struck between a news photograph’s competing functions as both documentary record and art object. It is not impossible to create something that is at once both visually perceptive and of great journalistic importance. Ryan Kelly’s work at the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, last August is testament to this. In one harrowing frame, Mr Kelly captured the moment James Alex Fields Jr rammed his car into a crowd of counter-protestors, killing one woman, Heather Heyer, and injuring 19. The photograph is impossible to make sense of in a single glance, capturing the chaos and terror of that moment, and cannot be isolated from its news context.  Whether it failed to win this year’s grand prize because it is less aesthetically polished, or because that might have been seen as a kind of perverse victory for the alt-right, is unknown. (There was controversy last year after Burhan Ozbilici won for his picture of an off-duty policeman who had just assassinated Andrey Karlov, Russia’s ambassador to Turkey, at an art gallery in Ankara.) What it would have been, however, is a victory for photojournalism: for the kind of news photograph that plays both roles, and would seem a little out of place hanging on your wall at home.