FOR the second time in a year, Ryanair, Europe’s largest low-cost carrier, is changing the way it charges for baggage. Until 2018 Ryanair had allowed passengers to carry one small bag and one wheelie bag in the cabin for free. It changed its policy in January—purportedly to speed up boarding—by making passengers dump their wheelie bags on the tarmac so ground staff could chuck them in the hold at the last minute. Under the latest rules, effective from November, wheelie bags will attract a fee no matter how they are transported: £6 ($7.80) in the cabin or £8 in the hold. For an airline whose customers often pay £10 or less for a ticket, the change is dramatic. Ryanair’s new policy is a return of sorts to the bad old days—before its public-relations makeover in 2014—when it allowed just one item of free luggage per passenger in the cabin. (Wheelie bags, however, used to be included in this allowance.) Michael O’Leary, Ryanair’s boss, launched the “Always Getting Better” programme four years ago after a shock profit warning and fears that his uncompromising no-frills business model was alienating customers. Many, including this newspaper at the time, doubted his sincerity, arguing that the airline’s no-nonsense approach to fees and surcharges had driven its commercial success. The sceptics were partly right. As well as rolling back its baggage policy to be even stingier than it was in the first place, Ryanair last year began splitting up passengers on the same booking when it came to seat allocation. The aim in both cases is to squeeze customers for more money: travellers who want to sit together and those with bulky luggage must pay extra. Mr O’Leary’s resurgent meanness is probably sensible. Wizz Air of Hungary, his main ultra-low-cost rival, is now doing a better job of cutting headline fares and recouping the shortfall from surcharges. It is also slashing unit costs by deploying larger aircraft: its new stretched Airbus A321neo airliners have 41 more seats than Ryanair’s Boeings. With 97 planes in service and 265 on order, Wizz is only going to become more of a headache for Mr O’Leary. And his long-suffering employees are unlikely to show sympathy: Ryanair’s grudging recognition of unions last year was soon followed this summer by a wave of strikes for more pay. European travellers should brace for more penny-pinching.