THE TALK of last year’s Edinburgh Festival Fringe was a comedy show that concentrated on the flaws and limitations of comedy. In “Nanette” Hannah Gadsby railed against the romantic notion that suffering is necessary to creativity; she made a compelling case for the damage the artform can cause, particularly to the performer. Jokes are an incomplete form of storytelling, she said: the need for tension and release in the form of set-ups and punchlines means that facts are often carefully edited to make them funny. When the facts being distorted relate to the joke-teller’s own trauma, such as Ms Gadsby’s quips about the abuse she suffered growing up gay in Tasmania, laughter can legitimise someone reducing themselves to the worst parts of their lives. “It’s not humility”, Ms Gadsby said. “It’s humiliation.” The impression Ms Gadsby made was of a woman who has been crushed under the omissions and half-truths required to generate laughs for a living. The self-deprecation on which she had built her comedy career was the result of a childhood “soaked in shame”, and she was no longer prepared to peddle it. “Tension is making me sick”, she said, explaining that “Nanette” would be her swansong. She wanted out of the game. Yet Ms Gadsby’s frankness launched her to international fame. After winning the award for best comedy show in Edinburgh, “Nanette” had runs in London and New York and sold out the Sydney Opera House, where the show was filmed as a Netflix special. After it aired in June, Ms Gadsby’s performance was picked over by the public; critics raved about it in the culture pages of newspapers and magazines. The Atlantic described “Nanette” as one of the “most extraordinary comedy specials in recent memory”. Some wondered whether comedy based on the performers’ pain had run its course. At this year’s Edinburgh festival, another Australian comic has offered a counterargument. For much of his show “Stay”, Steen Raskopoulos flicks through a series of surreal one-man character sketches: a vampire who loves to dance; a child lost in a supermarket whose anxious inner-monologue comes out as rap; a maudlin judge at a spelling bee; a yogi turned renegade. One scene, where Mr Raskopoulos insists that both he and the audience are at a royal gala inside a Royal Court apple, is so feverishly weird that it feels like a mutual hallucination. The format is in keeping with Mr Raskopoulos’s previous work, where his unusual characters have engendered laughter and tenderness. It’s a fun, fluid, but not altogether surprising ride, until the performer breaks with his own tradition to speak as a new character—himself. The enjoyable energy that has sustained the better part of an hour collapses into painful intimacy. Mr Raskopoulos reveals that he is not just a man blessed with a quirky imagination: he is prone to bouts of severe mental illness and, throughout his life, has been traumatised by hearing voices that are not his own. Within the last year, despite comedic success, these voices have reached such a pitch that suicide seemed the only option. The pain and guilt Mr Raskopoulos feels is difficult to watch. One aside, where he talks about slamming his head repeatedly into a shower wall to try and drown out his thoughts, is almost unbearably raw. There is little in the way of resolution or redemption; cavorting around on stage does not remove Mr Raskopoulos’s pain, nor does he try and glamorise sickness as a necessary catalyst for creativity. But in his brokenness, he explains, he has been able to make something that helps explain himself to himself; separating his chaotic internal world into distinct characters has allowed him to maintain his identity. Propelling those characters into ridiculous scenarios that others enjoy has alleviated some of his alienation and shame. As the stage fades to black, Mr Raskopoulos sits quietly, his chest heaving, sweat and tears testifying to the effort required to tell this story. The audience, who minutes ago were noisily laughing at his characters’ capers, file out in silence. While “Stay” has been well-received on the festival comedy circuit—picking up positive reviews in Melbourne as well as the Director’s Choice Award in Sydney—it is unlikely that the show will rocket Mr Raskopoulos to recognition in the way “Nanette” did for Ms Gadsby. Off-the-wall vignettes, several of which rely on improvisation and audience participation, do not typically bring television executives knocking. Nor does “Stay” negate the problems that Ms Gadsby identified with the structure of comedy and the painful reality it can obscure (indeed, Mr Raskopoulos has been vocal in his praise for “Nanette” on social media). But it serves as a reminder that comedy need not be an act of debasement for the performer. Shared laughter is a form of connection, and that can be a lifeline too.