WHEN Barack Obama created the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA), in 2012, he said his executive action would “lift the shadow of deportation” from people brought to America illegally as children. Donald Trump campaigned against the programme, saying he would “immediately” end it. Nearly a year ago, Jeff Sessions, the attorney-general, announced the administration would rescind the programme on March 5th 2018. But three of America’s federal courts—in New York, California and the District of Columbia—have blocked the wind-down. Now a fourth judge, a conservative jurist in Texas who blocked another of Mr Obama’s immigration orders in 2015, is poised to weigh in on the policy. If Judge Andrew Hanen rules that DACA’s second life should be cut short, legal confusion will ensue. The nearly 800,000 people living and working in America under the policy will find the cloud of deportation—already looming since September 5th 2017—casting a more ominous shadow. Mr Obama’s programme provides undocumented immigrants who arrived in America as children and meet other requirements renewable two-year reprieves from deportation and permits to work legally. DACA was promulgated not as legal amnesty but as “deferred action”—an exercise of prosecutorial discretion to put off any deportation proceedings against law-abiding people who, through no fault of their own, came to America without papers. But last autumn, Mr Sessions declared that because DACA was “an unconstitutional exercise of authority by the executive branch”, and would probably be deemed as such by the courts, it would be phased out in six months’ time. The attorney-general’s claim was dubious: no court had ever ruled that DACA is unconstitutional. And the three judges blocking Mr Trump’s decision to ditch the programme have held, quite to the contrary, that the administration has stated no plausible argument for ending it. The most recent ruling, from Judge John Bates, called the move “arbitrary and capricious” in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act. Mr Sessions provided “scant legal reasoning” and ignored the fact that the wind-down would upend the lives of “hundreds of thousands of beneficiaries, many of whom had structured their education, employment and other life activities on the assumption that they would be able to renew their DACA benefits”. And while the judges in San Francisco and Brooklyn (in January and February, respectively) ordered the government to resume processing renewals for people who already have DACA protections, Judge Bates’s decision went further. The administration would also be required to invite and accept applications from people who had never been a part of the programme. Judge Bates held his decision in abeyance for 90 days to give the Trump administration time to send along a better justification for ending DACA. On August 3rd that span passed and the judge ordered DACA fully rekindled, but again gave the government a 20-day grace period to appeal the decision. With an appeal now in the works, all eyes are on a lawsuit filed by Ken Paxton, the attorney-general of Texas, and nine of his counterparts or governors in mainly southern and midwestern states. The multi-state complaint mirrors conservative talking points that have dogged DACA since its inception. “DACA is unconstitutional because it rewrote federal law over the objections of Congress”, Mr Paxton said, in a reference to immigration-reform proposals that failed to become law. It is based on a “dangerous view of executive power” according to which presidents can “unilaterally set aside any duly enacted law” they disagree with. Seeking to undercut the three DACA-friendly judicial rulings this year, the lawsuit takes aim at DACA itself rather than buttress the process by which Mr Trump tried to end it. But here things become a little tricky. If Judge Hanen issues an injunction barring future DACA approvals and renewals on the grounds that Mr Obama’s initiative may have been unconstitutional when it was announced, what becomes of the three earlier rulings that Mr Trump’s rescission of DACA was illegal? It is enough to give even the most talented lawyer a headache. And it is likely to generate enough perceived leeway for Mr Trump to instruct the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) to stop honouring both new applications and renewals—a significant step toward the demise of DACA he originally hoped to take on March 5th. The hundreds of thousands of people who benefit from DACA have been watching the legal wrangling over their status and their future with mounting uncertainty. One advocacy group, the Immigrant Legal Resource Centre, advises people with DACA that it is “hard to predict the outcome of all the pending litigation” and outlines three possible scenarios: DACA renewals could be accepted for the time being, the entire programme could be cancelled outright, or DACA could remain in effect in parts of the country while it is blocked in others. Any of the permutations would ultimately trigger appeals and requests for emergency relief from the Supreme Court. If the justices get involved, America may be in for a bout of deja-vu. In 2016, when the court was asked to consider the legality of DAPA, Mr Obama’s 2014 order shielding parents of American citizens and lawful permanent residents from deportation, it was down one justice and deadlocked 4-to-4 along ideological lines, letting the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals decision stand without a majority ruling. Today the court again stands at eight members while Judge Brett Kavanaugh, Mr Trump’s pick to fill Justice Anthony Kennedy’s seat, awaits Senate confirmation. His hearings begin on September 4th.