APPEARING in her first film at the age of 35, Glenn Close arrived late on the silver screen. She quickly came to dominate a certain kind of female role, thanks in part to her angular and unusual good looks. Her breakthrough came in “Fatal Attraction” (1987), a film built around the most enduring of misogynist tropes: the spurned woman turned deranged stalker (the murderous harpy is a staple of Western entertainment, as old as Medea and Clytemnestra). Then, in 1995, Ms Close graduated to pure evil, playing the would-be animal slayer Cruella de Vil in “101 Dalmatians”. Now, at a still-luminous 71, Ms Close has been handed a new role, albeit one just as circumscribed. In “The Wife”, directed by Björn Junge, she plays the devoted wife as muse—a self-effacing helpmate supporting her husband’s artistic gift. Based on the novel from 2003 by Meg Wolitzer, the film tells the story of a marriage built on sacrifice and subterfuge. Joe Castleman (Jonathan Pryce) is about to win the Nobel Prize for Literature; his wife Joan (Ms Close) goes to the phone extension to listen in on the call from the Swedish Academy. The expressions that cross her face—a shifting alchemy of joy and envy and something else that only later emerges as repressed rage—sum up their relationship and the film as a whole. Over a taut hour and a half, viewers watch Joan’s orderly world implode. The couple’s trip to Stockholm to collect the prize is cut with flashbacks to their 1950s courtship at Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts, where Joe was her married literature tutor. This power imbalance is a persistent theme: the younger Joan (played by Ms Close’s daughter Annie Starke) elects to shelve her own ambitions of literary stardom to protect her husband’s fragile ego. “I had low expectations of what I could achieve as a female writer,” the older Joan acidly tells a nosy would-be biographer in Stockholm, recalling the night decades before when a bitter Smith alumna advised her not to even try. A brief scene of white male publishers discussing authors is an ugly nod to the casual contempt and misogyny of the early 1960s, in the vein of “Mad Men”. This is the world that formed Joan, but by 1992, with her husband’s ultimate triumph, the façade starts to crumble. “My wife doesn’t write, thank God,” Joe airily assures the Swedes when they arrive; while he is squired around, Joan is offered shopping trips and beauty treatments. From this moment to the twist-filled ending, the film belongs to Ms Close. Few actors wordlessly convey so much: Joan’s battle with all she has repressed plays across the actor’s astonishingly expressive face. Nominated six times for an Oscar, she has never won. This performance ought to break the streak. Mr Pryce, meanwhile, plays the narcissistic literary lion almost to caricature, childlike and entitled and philandering. Their confrontations, when they come, are as riveting as they are horrible. “The Wife” is not a great film—it is too obvious and didactic. Still, it feels necessary for this moment, charting women’s long struggle to assert their skills and ambition without being impeded by men. Ms Close gives a performance of exquisite power and restraint; many women will relate to her quiet rage. Off-screen, Ms Close is well aware of the effects of male influence on her own career. Things have improved, she told an Australian journalist, “but there always seems to be an almost biological barrier for men to accept the leadership of women.” Lest any imagine they can turn back the clock, she keeps the knife from “Fatal Attraction” hanging in her kitchen. “The Wife” premieres on August 8th in Britain and opens in America on August 17th