IMM AZIZ DIRAWI was enjoying breakfast with her four sons when militiamen barged into her home. Aziz, Ibrahim, Mansour and Ahmad, aged between 13 and 31 (pictured, above), were taken away. It was 1982, in the midst of the Lebanese civil war; a few miles away in Beirut, the Sabra and Shatila massacre was taking place, in which thousands of Palestinian refugees like the Dirawi family were killed. Ms Dirawi never discovered what became of her children. Over the course of the 15-year conflict an estimated 17,000 people would vanish. Some were kidnapped by fighters and are thought to be buried in mass graves. Others went out to visit relatives, or to buy groceries, and never returned. For those left behind, the war did not end in 1990. They are still waiting for closure, even if that means a fragment of bone to bury. The International Day of the Disappeared, which takes place annually on August 30th, is a painful reminder that these stories may never be resolved. Creative projects in Lebanon attempt to pay tribute to the lost and bear witness to the suffering of their families. Dalia Khamissy, a photographer, began working on “The Missing of Lebanon” in 2010. She begins by sitting down with each family and listening to their story before deciding what to photograph. She has taken portraits of the parents, siblings and children of the missing young men as well as the belongings safeguarded in anticipation of their return. She shares her work with thousands of followers on her Facebook page, where she is sometimes contacted by others who want to tell stories of lost loved ones. A father from one family kept meticulous diaries recording everything the family did each day for decades so that his son could catch up if he ever came home; he died without ever learning the fate of his missing child. Ms Dirawi treasures her sons’ possessions, which Ms Khamissy captures individually, according each one the status of an artefact. One photograph shows the schoolbag of Ahmad, the youngest son, a worn red-and-green satchel with rusty buckles. Another image shows a battered packet of cigarettes, purchased by the oldest son, Aziz, before his disappearance; his mother has carefully reinforced the 36-year-old packet of Marlboro Reds with Sellotape. Ms Khamissy hopes to photograph around 70 families over the coming year and create an exhibition that will document stories from all over Lebanon through photography, video, audio recordings and maps. “I think this is one of the biggest and most terrible issues of the aftermath of the war in Lebanon,” she says. “So many families are suffering. Not knowing is one of the cruellest things.” The void left by missing relatives is also captured in “Empty Chairs, Waiting Families”, a project launched in 2016 by the International Committee of the Red Cross, ACT for the Disappeared, a local NGO, and Artichoke Studio, an art-therapy centre in Beirut. Participants paint chairs, symbolising the act of waiting for someone who may never come home. The project was inspired by a similar initiative in Afghanistan, in which families were invited to work on a memory box; participants in Lebanon felt that a box was too evocative of a coffin. A small exhibition of the chairs in Beirut last year (pictured) marked 42 years since the war started. By next year’s anniversary, says Justine di Mayo, the director of Act for the Disappeared, there will be more than 100 chairs to exhibit. Nariman*, whose parents disappeared when she was 15 months old, has copied an old black-and-white photograph onto two folding chairs (pictured, below). In it, her mother and father sit side by side, their infant daughter between them: it is the only image she has of the parents she was too young to remember. Anisse, whose brother Ali went missing at Beirut port in 1975, likes to imagine him escaping to safety. She covered her chair with a painting of dark blue waves; in one corner of the seat, a figure waves to a distant boat, seeking rescue. Hoda, whose husband Salim has been missing since 1982, painted a landscape in memory of his love of photography and nature. “The chair took me back to when Salim was still with us. I was happy to remember the details and to remember him this way,” she writes. “The project also introduced me to other people living a tragedy like mine. I felt I am not alone.” The project aims to forge a bond between the families of the missing, even those from sects who fought against each other during the war, says Ms di Mayo. The exhibitions bring together families from all over the country who have experienced the same sense of loss. “They start seeing the other as a victim as well, not anymore as belonging to the community that kidnapped their sons.” It provides an outlet for grief but also raises awareness—crucial, Ms di Mayo says, in order to pressure the government into properly investigating the fates of the missing. Families have waited decades for a comprehensive statement; a state-led investigation in 2000 lasted six months and resulted in a two-page document asserting that all the missing were dead. Human-rights organisations like Act for the Disappeared and the Committee of the Families of Kidnapped and the Disappeared are campaigning for the establishment of an independent commission. In the meantime, projects like “The Missing of Lebanon” and “Empty Chairs, Waiting Families” keep fading memories alive. *Many participants in “Empty Chairs, Waiting Families” chose to give their first names or remain anonymous