THE winners of Florida’s governor primaries on August 28th epitomise the divisions in their parties. Andrew Gillum, the 39-year-old Democratic mayor of Tallahassee, is a forceful champion of all of the most progressive policy proposals of Bernie Sanders, the self-proclaimed democratic socialist who ran for the presidency. Ron DeSantis, a three-term member of Congress, also 39, is such a groupie of President Donald Trump that he reads “The Art of the Deal” to his newborn son Mason and shows his young daughter Madison how to build a border wall with colourful toy blocks while teaching her to say “Make America Great Again”. Initially, pollsters had predicted both would lose against establishment candidates. The victory of Mr Gillum was an even bigger surprise than that of Mr DeSantis. He beat Gwen Graham, the daughter of Bob Graham, a former senator and governor, who far outraised him and stands for centrist Democratic policies that usually make candidates electable. He also beat two wealthy businessmen, Jeff Greene and Philip Levine, who spent tens of thousands of dollars on ads attacking Ms Graham and largely ignored Mr Gillum whom they considered a lesser rival. “I was expecting to give a much different speech tonight,” Ms Graham said at her election party in Orlando on August 28th. But she is now focused on the Democratic candidate winning Florida’s governorship, which has been in Republican hands for more than two decades. In her congratulatory call to her rival she said she told him “now, Andrew, go out and win this damn thing”. Mr Gillum is the second black nominee for governor in the South, along with Stacey Abrams, whose nomination in neighbouring Georgia enthused liberals, as did the nomination of Ben Jealous as Democratic gubernatorial candidate in Maryland and the election of Justin Fairfax as lieutenant governor in Virginia. Both Mr Gillum and Ms Abrams would be the first black governor in their state if elected. Both will have to fight possibly bruising battles against their Republican opponents. Mr Gillum in particular will face tough questions about his involvement in a corruption probe by the FBI during his tenure as mayor. Mr DeSantis who was forecast to lose against Adam Putnam, the agriculture commissioner and former congressman, had already started to hammer Mr Gillum about the corruption probe on the night of the election. The self-described “pitbull Trump defender” caught the president’s eye when he appeared more than 100 times on Fox News, mostly to attack Robert Mueller, the special counsel leading the investigation into Russia’s interference in 2016. After praising Mr DeSantis on Twitter, Mr Trump gave Mr DeSantis his full endorsement in June against the advice of Mike Pence, the vice-president. It did the trick. Mr DeSantis handily beat Mr Putnam, who had out-fundraised him two to one. The governor’s race will be a test for the base of each party in the most important swing state. Mr Gillum is backed by Mr Sanders as well as Tom Steyer, an activist billionaire pushing hard for the impeachment of Mr Trump, and George Soros, another billionaire championing liberal causes. According to the unabashedly progressive Mr Gillum, who backs the abolition of the he federal Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency, which is charged with rounding up and deporting undocumented migrants, as well as universal health care and a minimum wage of $15, the Democratic Party has failed to win the governorship in Florida since 1994 because it put up “Republican-lite” candidates (like Ms Graham) who failed to excite minorities and youngsters. Mr DeSantis on the other hand is almost exclusively betting on the popularity with the base of Mr Trump even though he won Florida by less than two percentage points. Mr DeSantis's win is likely to make campaigning trickier for Rick Scott, the outgoing Republican governor who easily won the Republican primary for a Senate seat on August 28th. Mr Scott wants to unseat Bill Nelson, the three-term Democratic senator, and has so far avoided any mention of Mr Trump on the campaign trail. He used to be chummy with the president, but has disagreed with him on the separation of immigrant families at the border and his treatment of Puerto Ricans ravaged by the hurricane. Mr Scott did not join the president on a recent campaign rally in Tampa, where Mr Trump campaigned for Mr DeSantis. Even so, given the difference a “full and total” endorsement on Twitter by Mr Trump has made for Mr DeSantis Mr Scott may decide to align himself more closely with the president. So far all but two of the 37 candidates endorsed by the president in state races have won. And even Mr Trump’s mounting legal troubles have not done much to sway voters so far.