ONE of the biggest events on the American sports calendar features no games at all. On “Selection Sunday” in early March, all eyes are on the selection committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), which announces the last 36 teams to qualify for the “March Madness” basketball tournament, and reveals the seedings and regional venues for the entire 68-team bracket. The first 32 schools are guaranteed a ticket to the “Big Dance” by winning the annual tournament of their “conference”, groups of around ten colleges that play against each other regularly. However, the fate of every team that fails to triumph in one of these knockout-format events—a group that includes many of the best programmes in the country, since the strongest conferences each contain a number of national contenders—rests with the selection committee. When the big day arrives, they sit huddled together in front of televisions, waiting to leap for joy if they secure a coveted invitation, and to hang their heads in dejection otherwise. The selection process is at least partly subjective, and half the fun—at least for fans without ties to schools on the wrong side of the committee’s decisions—is the passionate debate about seeds and snubs that invariably ensues. Perhaps the most influential factor in the NCAA committee’s choices is Ratings Percentage Index (RPI), a 40-year-old statistic intended to measure team quality. An innovative metric for its time, RPI was designed to address the wildly varying strengths of opposition that college-basketball squads face. Teams in the “power conferences” compete against a steady diet of future professional stars, whereas those in lesser conferences might struggle against an elite high-school team. The NCAA has long recognised the limitations of its signature metric, tweaking the calculation over the years and introducing newer, more sophisticated systems into the committee’s decision-making process. Nonetheless, venerable old RPI has retained pride of place, and the hoary ranking system has been a much better predictor of which teams the committee will choose than more modern statistics are. But after a long run, RPI has at last come to the end of the road. On August 22nd the NCAA announced that starting in 2019, it would use a new, custom-built statistical model to replace RPI. The new system, dubbed the NCAA Evaluation Tool, or NET, incorporates many of the factors long identified as missing from RPI, such as score differential and offensive and defensive efficiency. Unlike RPI, which uses a publicly-available algorithm, NET relies on machine-learning techniques and will likely remain a black box. Since the NCAA has chosen not to publish NET ratings for past seasons, we won’t get even a glimpse of the workings of the system until the first numbers are released a few weeks into the season, in late November or early December. Until then, fans and analysts will be left guessing as to the potential benefits of the new metric. But despite the advantages of a publicly disclosed algorithm—for instance, that independent analysts could replicate and audit it immediately—NCAA basketball is one instance where some secrecy could be a good thing. The March Madness extravaganza is such a high-stakes event, and RPI has played such a prominent role in the selection process, that coaches have gone to great lengths to game the system. Some tweaks made that more difficult, but the result remained a prime example of Goodhart’s Law: the metric representing basketball skill became more important than true basketball skill. When teams set a goal of a high RPI, RPI’s correlation with basketball skill decreased. RPI was designed to reward teams not only for winning a lot of games, but also for playing difficult schedules and, more recently, for contesting a greater number of road games. Three-quarters of the metric is its strength-of-schedule component, meaning that quality of opposition is far more important than a team’s own winning percentage. Savvy coaches arranged to play more games against teams whose winning percentages outstripped their true ability levels—for instance, because they play in weaker conferences. Even a nearly guaranteed loss against an elite team could be a smart move through the lens of RPI, because adding a top-tier opponent has such a positive effect on a team’s overall strength-of-schedule rating. On the flip side, scheduling a game against a very weak opponent is a rookie mistake, because the sure win, regardless of the score, isn’t enough of a benefit to counteract the hit to strength of schedule. These are fixable problems, even if RPI was never the right tool to address them. More accurate ratings systems, such as those compiled by Kenneth Massey, Ken Pomeroy and Jeff Sagarin, rely on scoring margin, as teams that record many victories by slim margins are less likely to keep winning than those that win comfortably. The group that created RPI was aware of the predictive value of scoring margin from the beginning, but tried to work around it to avoid rewarding teams for needlessly running up the score. Since then, margin of victory has been kept out of the equation by concerns that gamblers would try to manipulate final scores. One alternative metric, Dean Oliver’s College Basketball Power Index (BPI) handles some of these issues by valuing each additional point in the scoring margin less than the previous one, meaning that, say, a 30-point victory adds only a bit more to a team’s rating than a 20-point one. The new NET metric uses a similar, if less graceful, approach, considering margin of victory but treating all differences of ten points or more as equal. NET may do a better job with another staple of advanced metrics: offensive and defensive efficiency, which take into account a wide range of inputs, from shots made and missed to steals and blocks, to measure a team’s effectiveness per possession on either side of ball. Efficiency numbers are a more accurate measure of overall skill than raw point totals. The core tension that the NCAA hopes to resolve with its new algorithm is the awkward balance between rewarding certain types of behaviour—winning lots of basketball games, preferably against good teams, many of them on the road—with identifying the schools that will perform best in the spectacle that is March Madness. These targets overlap, of course. But compromise will always be required. For instance, the selection committee has occasionally knocked down a team’s tournament seed due to the injury of a key player, reflecting an interest in the latter, purely predictive goal. But a fully-fledged health adjustment, such as the component of Mr Oliver’s BPI that identifies situations in which teams underperformed due to regular-season injuries, will probably always be a step too far. The NET algorithm, a manifestation of that tension, is virtually guaranteed to underperform the current best-in-class predictive metrics. But while analysts and fans will complain about the concealed inner workings of the new measure, a black box—especially one that incorporates the state of the art in hoops analytics—minimizes the influence of scheduling savvy. Granted, some independent analyst is likely to have reverse-engineered the system successfully by Christmas. But the NCAA will continue to make adjustments, meaning that schools must chase a moving target if they attempt to hack the NET as they arrange each year’s schedule. The March Madness field will always have its share of controversial—and sometimes embarrassingly wrong—selections. But this overhaul of the process will not only make the tournament better, it will keep coaches honest and give us a more entertaining regular season.