TWO months ago, in Masterpiece Cakeshop v Colorado Civil Rights Commission, the Supreme Court handed a victory to Jack Phillips, a Christian baker who asserted a constitutional right to refuse to make a cake celebrating the marriage of two men. The vote was lopsided (7-2), but the judgment was narrow. In his majority opinion, Justice Anthony Kennedy left for another day a full analysis of what ought to happen when devout shop owners claim that their freedoms of speech and religion are violated when the state asks them to do business with customers on an even-handed basis. The court sided with Mr Phillips because it saw signs that the Colorado civil-rights commission was overtly hostile toward the baker’s religious beliefs. “[T]he outcome of some future controversy involving facts similar to these”, but without evidence that agents of the state were bigoted, Justice Kennedy wrote, is up for grabs. The next case has arrived. Autumn Scardina, a transgender woman, telephoned Masterpiece Cakeshop on June 26th last year to order a custom birthday cake. Ms Scardina informed the bakery’s co-owner, Debi Phillips, that she would like the cake to be ready on July 6th and that it should serve 6-8 people. All fine. But when she requested that the confection be pink on the inside and blue on the outside as a “reflection of the fact that she transitioned from male-to-female and that she had come out as transgender on her birthday”, Ms Phillips stopped the conversation short. The bakery would make no such cake. Mr Phillips later explained that he will not create a cake that "promote[s] the idea that a person's sex is anything other than an immutable God-given biological reality”. Colorado’s civil-rights commission fielded a complaint from Ms Scardina that Masterpiece Cakeshop had denied her full enjoyment of its services in violation of the Colorado Anti-Discrimination Act (CADA), a law barring places of public accommodation from denying service on the basis of protected characteristics including race, disability, sexual orientation and gender identity. On June 28th this year, three weeks after the Supreme Court handed down Masterpiece Cakeshop, the commission agreed with Ms Scardina and ordered the customer and the bakery to find an “amicable resolution of these charges by compulsory mediation”. This response prompted a furious follow-up lawsuit. On August 14th, Mr Phillips’s lawyers at the Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF), a conservative Christian legal advocacy organisation, turned on the rhetoric. Colorado “has been on a crusade to crush” Mr Phillips since 2012, the ADF wrote in its complaint. The state “despise[s]” his beliefs and his religion. Thumbing its nose at Mr Phillips and the Supreme Court’s recent ruling, Colorado “has renewed its war” against Mr Phillips and has sided with people who have “targeted” him for ill treatment by requesting cakes that violate his conscience. It does appear that Mr Phillips’s notoriety as the baker who turned away a gay couple from his shop in 2012 spurred some Denver-area people to taunt him. The ADF told the federal court that over the past year, the baker has received requests for “cakes celebrating Satan, featuring Satanic symbols, depicting sexually explicit materials and promoting marijuana use”. Some of those calls may have come from Ms Scardina, Mr Phillips suspects. But while most of these orders may be idle attempts to rile a Christian baker, the blue and pink birthday cake request is a brilliant move that should force the federal courts—perhaps including the Supreme Court—to reckon with loose ends the first Masterpiece Cakeshop ruling let dangle. The main point of contention in the gay-wedding cake dispute was whether Mr Phillips turned away Charlie Craig and David Mullins because they are gay (which is, by all accounts, illegal under CADA) or because they requested a cake Mr Phillips wouldn’t bake under any other circumstances for any other couple (which is not a violation of the law). The facts weren’t favourable to Mr Phillips, because he shut down the conversation with Messrs Craig and Mullins before they requested any particular design. And at the oral argument, the baker’s lawyers had a difficult time explaining why siding with him wouldn’t grease a slippery slope that gives anyone connected with a wedding—from the makeup artist to the jeweller—a right to refuse to do business with gays and lesbians. Another line of questioning from the December 2017 hearing is key to the new case. Justice Elena Kagan asked Noel Francisco, the solicitor general, if a win for Mr Phillips would permit a chef to refuse to serve dinner to two members of the same sex celebrating their wedding anniversary. It took some time for Mr Francisco to get around to answering. He dodged, he weaved, he proposed another scenario of his own creation. But Justice Kagan would have none of it: “I would like an answer to my hypothetical”. Both his reticence in answering and his eventual response are telling: no, the famous chef could not refuse a reservation for the dinner. Creating a meal probably isn’t speech, he said, and in any case celebrating an anniversary isn’t an “expressive event” akin to a wedding. Mr Phillips has insisted all along that he never turns away customers based on their sexual or gender identity. His mantra is that “he would be happy to” sell anybody anything in the shop and would “create birthday cakes, shower cakes, or any other cakes for” LGBT people—just not a cake celebrating gay nuptials. Now it seems his conscience bars him from creating a much wider array of goodies, including the very birthday cakes he said he’d be “happy” to make, if the design is inconsistent with his religious beliefs. The only reason he turned down Ms Scardina’s birthday-cake request was because the design reflected her gender identity. As Masterpiece II gears up and a second potential battle at the Supreme Court looms, another piece of evidence adds to the sense that Mr Phillips’s refusal is rooted in identity-based discrimination inconsistent with Justice Kennedy’s announcement in Masterpiece I that civil-rights laws legitimately protect LGBT people seeking “whatever products and services they choose on the same terms and conditions are offered to other members of the public”. One of the biblical sources informing Mr Phillips’s faith, the ADF lawyers wrote in his complaint, is 2 Corinthians 6:14-18. “Do not be yoked together with unbelievers”, the passage reads. “For what do righteousness and wickedness have in common?...Come out from them and be separate, says the Lord”. 