HOW STRONG is the American economy? It depends who you ask. Just 37% of Democrats say the economy is in good shape according to the Pew Research Centre, a think-tank. Among Republicans, the figure is twice as high. By one reckoning, this partisan gap in economic sentiment is now at its widest point since at least Ronald Reagan’s presidency. The divide may not just be in people’s heads. Figures from the Bureau of Labour Statistics show that since Donald Trump’s 2016 election, job growth has been slightly higher on average in the parts of the country that voted for Mr Trump than the ones that voted for Hillary Clinton. In 2017, employment in red counties grew by roughly 1.7%, up from 1% in 2016. In blue counties, employment in 2017 grew by 1.6%. A study released today by Indeed, a jobs website, estimates that in the past year and a half, the unemployment rate has fallen 0.9 percentage points for likely Trump supporters and 0.7 percentage points for likely Clinton supporters. There are three possible explanations for the improving economic fortunes of Trump country. First, some industries that are concentrated in conservative parts of America—most notably mining—are growing faster than the overall economy. Second, the American economy is in the latter stages of an expansion when firms tend to hire more unskilled workers, a trend which may favour Trumpier cities and towns. Finally, confidence among Trump supporters may be providing a psychological boost to consumption and investment. Academic research suggests that consumer sentiment can influence economic activity. A recent poll by Ipsos shows that 66% of Republicans feel more comfortable making a major purchase than they did six months ago. Among Democrats the figure is just 44%. While jobs may be plentiful in red parts of America for the moment, liberal parts of the country are still better off by many measures. The employment rate in Trump counties, as measured by the share of the total population with a job, is 46% compared with 49% in counties that favoured Mrs Clinton. Jobs in liberal parts of the country also pay higher wages (most likely because the job opportunities in such places are different). Workers in red counties earn an average of about $860 per week; in blue counties the figure is $1,200, or 40% more. Mr Trump has many economic statistics he can tout while on the campaign trail. These might not be the best examples.