MORE than a decade ago, a colleague of Bartleby’s left the world of journalism for a better-paid life in public relations. He was most impressed with the brand new pager and mobile phone that he received on the first day at work. To him, they were the symbols of modernity; to me, they were the 21st-century equivalent of shackles. The company wanted him to be available at all times. That happened before the days of smartphones and the apps that have come with them. Nowadays, we are all more familiar with the drawbacks of modern technology. They are addictive, leading us to check them ceaselessly; a form of FOMO (fear of missing out). Not being up with the news, or being out of the loop with the activities of our acquaintances, seems to diminish our social status. Electronic communication also breaks down the barrier between work and home life. It is hard to tell whether we are working harder (because we check e-mails in the evenings and at weekends) or less hard (because we spent our time at work checking out Facebook and personal e-mail). A new survey by Adobe finds that, in the previous month, 19% of people checked work e-mail while at a meal with others, a proportion that rises to 28% among 25-34 year olds. But before we get too sympathetic about their work-related stress, 27% of people (and 34% of 25-34 year olds) checked personal e-mail in the same circumstances. That seems more like rudeness than stress. The same survey found that people spent 2.5 hours each day checking personal e-mail each workday, a figure that had risen 17% over the previous year; the addiction is getting worse, not better. More than a quarter of people checked their personal e-mail while still in bed. Our clear fascination with personal communication is matched by our frustration with work-related stuff. The Adobe survey focused on the most irritating phrases in work e-mails, which exclusively related to passive-aggressive reminders about previous messages. “Not sure if you saw my last e-mail” was the least favourite. It is possible, of course, that people didn’t see the message, since many of us receive hundreds of e-mails a day, but given the statistics already quoted in this piece, it seems unlikely. Yes, we saw your last e-mail and have not got round to dealing with it. Interestingly, almost twice as many workers prefer to receive e-mails than to get a phone call, perhaps because the former are easier to ignore. And this hints at the paradox of electronic communication. We like to see what is going on but we are less keen on showing some positive reaction, perhaps because the next form of electronic stimulus (a tweet, a WhatsApp message) is only a second way. Despite the flood of messages, to use the (slightly adjusted for grammar) quote from “Cool Hand Luke” that headlines this piece, what we’ve got here is a failure to communicate. If the point of an e-mail is to generate a response, it often doesn’t work. It is an illustration of the difficulty of altering worker behaviour, as demonstrated by the way that open-plan offices lead to less face-to-face interaction, not more. In the face of 24-hour communication, we rebel in our own quiet way. We put personal communication first, and we reply in our own sweet time.