YOUTUBE makes it clear what is prohibited on the site: nudity, incitement to violence, threats, disclosure of private information, and so on. The company kills off accounts that post certain types of video, such as those containing violent extremism. The company uses a lighter touch, though, when dealing with lesser sins such as minor threats against individuals. These merit “Community Guidelines” strikes, an accumulation of which can lead to a ban. These have made the news of late because in July, Alex Jones, a conspiracy theorist who runs a website called Infowars, was given a strike. He then violated the terms under which he was allowed to continue using YouTube, so the company banned all the channels and videos under his control. Every day, 600,000 hours of new video are uploaded to YouTube. The company has long had problems ensuring that new submissions violate neither company policy nor national laws. In the past, it relied on users to flag inappropriate content, which employees would then check. With complaints on the increase, the company last year began using algorithms to analyse films for their appropriateness, an approach it had previously adopted for identifying films that infringed copyright laws. YouTube removed more than 8m videos in the fourth quarter of 2017, over 85% of which were flagged by machine-learning algorithms. It now has almost 10,000 people examining videos that have been flagged up either by machines or by actual users (particularly members of its Trusted Flagger programme). Videos that have been tagged and deemed inappropriate (but not so inappropriate as to necessitate the immediate closure of the account) are removed from the site and their creator is given a strike. At that point the account-holder may be prohibited from live-streaming for 90 days, as Mr Jones was. If the account-holder ignores the prohibition they may be banned altogether. (This was Mr Jones’s fate after he put up a livestream on another YouTube channel under his control.) If during those 90 days they get a second strike unrelated to the first, they are stopped from posting any content at all for two weeks. A third strike sees the account deleted. Mr Jones got his strike after posting four videos that YouTube removed for violating its policies on hate speech and child endangerment. One showed a child being pushed to the ground, while another alleged that Islam had conquered Europe. Oddly, a video in which Mr Jones mimed shooting Robert Mueller, who is investigating Russian influence on the election of 2016, was not deemed offensive. Mr Jones was given a strike in February in relation to a video alleging that David Hogg, a survivor of the shooting at Stoneman Douglas High School in Florida was an actor, but that had expired. In the past, apparently concerned about accusations of liberal bias, YouTube has seemed unwilling to take action against those who run popular but controversial accounts. The three-strike system offers a way to chastise an offender and then allow them to make amends. By deciding that four offending videos by Mr Jones merited just a single strike, YouTube did little to dispel accusations of pusillanimity. But its subsequent action in banning Mr Jones suggests that a line has been crossed. Mr Jones may have hoped that YouTube would be loth to cross a figure praised by President Donald Trump. The fact that he has now disappeared from the world’s most popular video-streaming service could signal a change in the way the company deals with such accounts.