FOR nearly eight decades the seagulls have cawed, the waves have lapped against the sand and Britons have settled down to “By The Sleepy Lagoon”. The format of “Desert Island Discs” has hardly changed since it was first broadcast in 1942 from the Blitz-scorched BBC studios in Maida Vale. Famous guests select eight records to keep them company on a hypothetical desert island, answering questions in the gaps between them about their lives and careers. The last big innovations came in 1951, when castaways began choosing a book and a luxury for the ordeal (Sally Ann Howes, an actress and the first guest to take advantage of the new rule, plumped for garlic). This consistency makes it easy to trace changes in the cultural currents of British life. The guests themselves are more diverse. Early on, they tended to be what one castaway characterised as “men and women of distinction and enlightenment”; in practice this often meant they were drawn from the narrow echelons of high society. In October 1943, for instance, castaways included a sir, a lady and the son of a brigadier general. Roy Plomley, the show’s creator and host for over 40 years (pictured), greeted his guests with clipped vowels and upper-class charm; male castaways were often treated to lunch at the Garrick, a private club, beforehand. The toughest question many faced was about “going up” to Oxford. Now guests are drawn from a range of social classes, ethnicities and countries. Nadiya Hussain, the British Bangladeshi winner of “The Great British Bake Off”, appeared as a castaway in 2016. Ade Adepitan, a black Paralympian, appeared during the London Olympic games in 2012. The only royalty invited to celebrate 75 years of the programme was of the footballing variety: David Beckham chose Elton John and his England caps as his luxury item. Listen carefully, and you can also detect Britain’s changing social mores in “Desert Island Discs”. Plomley sometimes reflected the prejudices of his generation. He could be elitist—mocking Michael Palin for doing badly at university—and casually homophobic, asking John Hurt about the “dangers” of portraying a gay character. He had a post-war tight-lipped approach towards sex, and would surely not have introduced a castaway as having been “very promiscuous” in her youth, as Sue Lawley did in 1997. (Plomley’s widow was scandalised by the turn the show took in later years, complaining that Ms Lawley had an “obsession with other people’s sex lives.”) The show had started to take a more relaxed approach to sex and sexuality in tandem with the waves of feminism and gay-rights movement. Kirsty Young, the current host, is now a sensitive and thoughtful guide. Nigel Owens, a Welsh rugby referee, appeared last year and, in a moving episode, discussed how coming to terms with being gay affected his mental health. “Discs” reflected political changes, too, notably the public’s increasing disaffection and distrust of their elected representatives. When Denis Healey, the Chancellor of the Exchequer in a wobbly Labour government, appeared in 1978, Plomley kept his criticism gentle. “You have to imagine that you’re doomed to be on this desert island for perhaps the rest of your life,” the presenter explained. “You have to realise that in view of the office you hold, there will be listeners who wish it were true.” Ms Young, by contrast, happily lambasts politicians of all stripes. When Nick Clegg, then the leader of the Liberal Democrats, appeared in 2010 after taking his party into coalition with the Conservatives, the host was blunt. “Your ideals weren’t very much in evidence,” she suggested, “when you patted [Tory chancellor] George Osborne on the back this week.” A less reverent “Discs” has seen a wider variety of music, too. Under Plomley, guests mostly chose highbrow tracks. In 1942, castaways picked classical tunes 58% of the time; by 2016, Bach, Beethoven and the rest occupied just a fifth of choices. They were knocked off their ledge by the Beatles, who that year became interviewees’ favourites. “Guess what?” Ms Young said in 2017. “Rock’n’roll happened, pop happened, punk happened, thrash metal happened, garage happened, and we’re going to play that stuff, because it’s important to people. What we do is reflect.” Yet if “Discs” today reflects a more diverse and open Britain, it is easy to pick up on whispers of the past. Stirring patriotic tracks by Edward Elgar remain popular, as does Frank Sinatra. The programme reminds the listener of a more pious time: castaways are still offered a Bible to give them solace on the island. Then there’s that wonderful theme, played thousands of times for chefs and showmen, professors and priests. Just as it could in bombed-out London, the piece can still whisk listeners off to some secluded beach, alone except for their records and the sound of water lapping at their toes.