ACCORDING to Alexis Tsipras, its prime minister, “Greece is once again becoming a normal country, regaining its political and financial independence.” Eight years since public-debt woes forced Greece to seek a bail-out from the euro zone and the IMF, the government returned to borrowing on financial markets on August 20th. It is now running a healthy primary-budget surplus (ie, once interest payments are excluded). And after years of depression and then stagnation, the economy is growing again. But the crisis is not yet firmly in the rear-view mirror. Greece experienced an economic collapse that lasted longer than the Great Depression in America. In 2009 its prime minister, George Papandreou, admitted that the budget-deficit figures had been understated for years, and could be double those originally reported. Interest rates soared as ratings agencies downgraded Greece’s government debt. Mr Papandreou turned to the euro zone and the IMF for help. In total it has had three bail-out programmes, borrowing around €300bn ($346bn). Those loans have had conditions attached: that Greece slash its public spending, and reform its corrupt, inefficient government bureaucracy. Years of crisis and austerity have done profound damage to the economy. GDP, in real terms, is still a quarter below that in 2007. Investment is around two-thirds lower. One in five of the workforce, and two in five young people, are unemployed. Those who do have jobs have had their wages slashed; retirees have seen their pensions cut. The economy is now growing, but rates lag behind others in the euro zone. Economists fear that, without further reforms to cut red tape and speed up its courts systems, the Greek economy will struggle to take off. But they doubt Mr Tsipras will push such reforms through, particularly with a general election due by October next year. The public finances are not yet fixed either. The government-debt burden is a daunting 180% of GDP. Greece’s return to financial markets is cushioned by a debt-relief deal struck with the euro zone in June, which extends the maturities of some of its loans. It also has a cash buffer of €24bn, enough to cover nearly two years of its funding needs. In return, the government has agreed to eye-watering budget targets. It must run primary surpluses of 3.5% of GDP until 2022, and an average of 2.2% until 2060. Both official creditors and financial markets will be keeping a close eye on Greece. The debt-relief deal takes some of the pressure off over the next few years. But missed budget targets, weak growth or a sharp rise in interest rates will raise concerns about its ability to pay back its debt over the longer term. That is why the IMF reckons more relief might eventually be needed. Even euro-zone creditors have said they will return to the issue—but only in 15 years’ time. The return to normality will be slow. Dig deeperGreece’s eight-year odyssey shows the flaws of the EU (August 18th 2018)