IN MAY 1708 the San José, a 62-gun Spanish galleon, set sail from Portobelo, in what is now Panama, bound for Cartagena in Colombia. The ship carried 600 crew and a large fortune—200 tonnes of gold, silver and emeralds belonging to the viceroy of Peru. She never reached her destination: in June that year she was sunk by a squadron of British ships. For more than three centuries her final resting place remained a mystery. But on December 4th 2015 Juan Manuel Santos, Colombia’s president, announced that a team of archaeologists had found the wreck 30 miles off the Colombian coast. He promised to recover the ship and its contents, worth as much as $17bn, and build a museum in Cartagena to house them. Nearly three years later, however, the galleon remains on the seabed. What explains the delay? There is little agreement over who owns the San José. After five months of exploration the ship was located on November 27th 2015 by a team including the Colombian navy; Maritime Archaeology Consultants (MAC), a British firm; and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, which provided an unmanned submarine. Colombia’s government says the Submerged Cultural Heritage Law, passed in 2013, dictates that the wreck and its treasure belong to the state. Others dispute that. Spain’s government says UNESCO’s convention on underwater cultural heritage gives it rights to the ship. Sea Search Armada, an American exploration firm, claims it discovered the San José in 1981 and gave its location to the Colombian government. It believes it is due half the ship’s treasure. The government says the galleon was found in a different spot, although the exact co-ordinates are a state secret. With the wind in his sails, Mr Santos was eager to excavate and recover the ship. But the process has proved frustratingly slow. The project is estimated to cost $60m; Mr Santos wants a public-private partnership agreement in which a company finances the ship’s excavation and builds a laboratory and museum to preserve and display its treasures. In return, the company would receive up to 40% of any treasure not considered part of Colombia’s cultural heritage, such as gold and silver ingots. In March the contract for the partnership was put out to public tender. The deadline for submissions was initially set for April 24th, but it has been extended numerous times amid accusations of impropriety. Campaigners say the government unfairly favours MAC over other firms, a charge it denies. Many Colombians bristle at the idea of sharing the ship’s riches. In July a group of self-described “concerned citizens” sent a petition to a court in Bogotá to halt the public tender, arguing that it threatened Colombians’ rights. The process was briefly suspended while the case was heard, before resuming on August 2nd when it was rejected. Interested firms now have until August 10th to submit their bids. But there is a further twist: Mr Santos leaves office on August 7th. His successor, Iván Duque, must decide whether to go with the flow or change tack. Given their colonial past, Colombians are understandably wary of foreign profiteers. But with the wrecks of more than a thousand galleons and merchant ships thought to lie along the country's coastline, offering incentives to treasure-hunters seems a canny investment.