FOR as long as Major League Baseball (MLB) has been played, its games have been defined above all by a single position: the starting pitcher. Whereas each batter accounts for only one-ninth of his team’s opportunities to hit, the starter is solely responsible for retiring every one of the opposing club’s batters, until he tires or is removed. In any single game, swapping in the best hitter in MLB for one plucked off the scrap heap might improve a team’s chances of winning by five percentage points. In contrast, replacing a journeyman starter with the best pitcher in the sport would increase a club’s probability of victory by roughly 20 percentage points. In the marathon of a 162-game season, starting-pitching matchups are what make each contest unique: attendance often surges when a superstar is scheduled to take the mound. The Tampa Bay Rays have long been one of baseball’s most innovative teams, throwing tradition to the wind in areas like defensive shifts and position-switching. In 2018, however, they have moved beyond tactical tinkering and are upending the very structure of baseball, by dispensing with the concept of the starting pitcher altogether. Rather than having one starter last as long as he can, and finishing off the game if necessary with a series of short stints from relief pitchers, the Rays are now regularly opening games with a pitcher who will throw just one or two innings. They then hand the ball off to relievers, who can last for as little as one batter or as long as a starter’s customary five to seven innings, depending on circumstances and performance. Almost as surprising as the deployment of this novel approach to running a pitching staff is that it appears to be working. During its “bullpen games” this year, Tampa Bay has allowed far fewer runs on average than it has in contests where the team has used a conventional starting pitcher. TTOP of the heapThe method to the Rays’ madness stems from an inevitability as sure as death and taxes: the longer a starting pitcher stays in the game, the worse you can expect him to perform. During the 2018 MLB season to date, the first time a batting lineup faces a starting pitcher, its nine hitters have collectively produced a combined on-base and slugging percentage (OPS)—a standard measure of offensive performance—of 0.698. The next time they come to bat, they fare significantly better, with an OPS of 0.728. And pity the poor pitcher who must navigate his way through the lineup for a third time. Under these circumstances, batters’ OPS soars all the way to 0.795. This pattern has been similar for decades, and is sufficiently well-known that statistical analysts have given it its own acronym: the Times Through the Order Penalty (TTOP). The magnitude of the TTOP is hard to overstate. On their first trip through the order, MLB starters on average pitch well enough to improve an otherwise league-average team to a winning percentage around 54%. That level is nearly good enough for a club to contend for a spot in the playoffs. In contrast, by the third time through the lineup, those very same pitchers perform so badly that they would single-handedly drag an otherwise league-average team all the way down to a winning percentage below 42%— a rate that would rank among the worst club records in MLB. The TTOP cannot be attributed to a single cause. The simplest explanation is raw fatigue. Starters usually need around 70 pitches to get through an opposing lineup the first two times. By the time they need to retire the other team’s hitters yet again, they are already on the brink of exhaustion. Position players, in contrast, expend precious little energy over the course of a game: they spend the vast majority of their time motionless, either standing at attention on defence in case a ball is hit to them, or sitting in the dugout waiting for their turn to bat. As a result, they are just as fresh the third or fourth time they come to the plate as they are the first. (Managers compensate for this imbalance by having each starting pitcher throw only once every five games, whereas position players are expected to be in the lineup nearly every night.) Another important factor is familiarity: as Warren Spahn, a star player from the 1950s, famously said, “Hitting is timing. Pitching is upsetting timing.” During a hitter’s first at-bat, he sees the opposing starter’s repertoire for the first time, forcing him to react to an unfamiliar assortment of pitch speeds, movements and locations. By the third time, a starter has usually had to reveal the entirety of his arsenal. That puts the batter in a much better position to anticipate and recognise pitches before they arrive at home plate, and thus to hit them hard. Regardless of why it occurs, the TTOP has bedevilled managers since baseball’s earliest days. For roughly the century from 1870 to 1970, pitchers who started a game were expected to finish it if they were throwing well. Relievers were summoned only if the starter performed poorly or was running out of steam. The advent of the relief pitcher as a separate role and career path in the 1950s made it possible for managers to minimise the impact of the TTOP, by bringing in a fresh arm before their starters became ineffective. But although quantitative analysts have long implored teams to think outside the box when seeking to avoid the TTOP, the tradition rooted in the one-pitcher-per-game era has been hard to dislodge. Even as managers have expanded their rotations of starting pitchers from three to four to five members, and shortened starters’ average appearances from seven or eight innings to five or six, the basic structure of pitcher usage remained intact. Whoever starts the game keeps pitching until he gets into severe trouble or reaches a specified number of pitches. At that point, a parade of relievers each throw an inning or two (usually one), until the contest is over. The revolution will be televisedSigns of change first emerged in last year’s playoffs. In the seventh and decisive game of the American League Championship Series, one of MLB’s two best-of-seven semi-final series, the Houston Astros began in conventional fashion: they handed the ball to Charlie Morton, a starting pitcher who had received the customary four days’ rest between appearances. Mr Morton performed as well as Houston could possibly have hoped, holding the New York Yankees’ powerful offence scoreless through five innings while throwing just 54 pitches. Nonetheless, the Astros are among the most statistically literate teams in MLB, and knew that Mr Morton had already made his way through New York’s lineup twice. Even though he was not fatigued, he had few tricks left up his sleeve with which to surprise the Yankees’ hitters. Rather than running the risk that Mr Morton might struggle in the second half of the game, the Astros’ manager, A.J. Hinch, pre-emptively removed his starter in the middle of a stellar performance. Moreover, instead of handing the game over to his stable of relievers, Mr Hinch instead summoned another starter, Lance McCullers. On average, Mr McCullers’s performances throughout the 2017 season were not quite as dominant as those of Houston’s best relievers. However, 61% of Mr McCullers’s workload had come on the second time through the order or later. On his first trip through opposing lineups, Mr McCullers had been virtually unhittable. And he was likely to fare even better as a reliever, with no need to save energy for later innings. Sure enough, Mr McCullers completed the game with four scoreless innings, sending the Astros to the World Series and baseball statisticians into ecstasy. And eleven days later, Mr Hinch went back to his “tandem starters” with similar success. He had Mr McCullers start the seventh and final game of the World Series, but pulled him after just 49 pitches. Later on, he summoned a rested-and-ready Mr Morton to throw the concluding four innings, and deliver Houston its first-ever championship. So far, Mr Hinch has limited his boldness to elimination games in playoff series. During the regular season, he has stuck to a traditional starting rotation. But the Rays, who are nowhere close to contending for a title, have much less to lose by radical experimentation. Instead of saving tactics meant to combat the TTOP for particularly special occasions, they are now ditching the conventional starting pitcher on an everyday basis. As is often the case, necessity was the mother of Tampa Bay’s invention. The cash-strapped, small-market club began the season without a full complement of MLB-calibre starters. Moreover, two of its better pitchers, Blake Snell and Jacob Faria, have both been injured. So rather than calling up a weak arm from the minor leagues and allowing MLB hitters to pummel him, the Rays have decided to get creative instead. Once starting pitchers are removed from the game, all MLB managers attempt to “play matchups” to their advantage. They switch pitchers as soon as a reliever shows signs of fatigue. They routinely call in a new arm in order to maximise the share of plate appearances in which the batter and pitcher are both either right- or left-handed, because hitters tend to perform better when facing a hurler who throws from the opposite side of the mound. They also seek to save their most effective relievers for the most important situations, typically near the end of a game in which the score is either tied or their club has a narrow lead. Rather than waiting until a starter departs, the Rays have decided to deploy these same principles starting from the very first batter of the game. Because MLB teams rightly put their best hitters at the top of the lineup, the strongest batters are guaranteed to come up in the first inning. Unsurprisingly, more runs are scored in the first inning than in any other one. To counteract this advantage, the Rays have begun starting games with a fire-throwing reliever, now dubbed an “opener”, who can use all of his energy in each at-bat and departs after retiring a handful of hitters. As a result, once the lineup turns around, the pitcher expected to throw the largest share of innings—who under the conventional pattern would be the starter—will be facing these hitters for the first time rather than the second, avoiding the dreaded TTOP. This strategy is particularly effective if, say, three of the first four batters all hit from the same side of the plate, and the pitcher who would otherwise start the game throws from the opposite side. Once the “opener” departs, the Rays simply keep their options open. If their second pitcher seems to be throwing well, they can leave him in as long as they want: on May 26th, for example, they had the right-handed Ryne Stanek (pictured), a reliever by trade, face the Baltimore Orioles’ first five hitters, all of whom are righties. After he retired them in order, Tampa Bay then summoned Anthony Banda, a lefty, to pitch all the way through the end of the eighth inning. The Rays then closed out the game with another right-hander, when three righties were due up to bat. In other cases, Tampa Bay can resort to a true “bullpen game”: on July 15th, the club used eight different pitchers in the first nine innings. None of them faced the same hitter twice. I have seen the future, and it worksSo far, the experiment has been a resounding success. During the 70 games this season in which the Rays have used a traditional starter, they have allowed 4.43 runs per nine innings. In contrast, in the 37 games when they have begun games with a short-lived reliever, they have surrendered just 3.87 runs per nine innings. None of this gap can be explained by the quality of opposing lineups, or the share of games played at home or in hitter- or pitcher-friendly stadiums—on average, the games occurred under nearly identical conditions. If sustained over a full season, this improvement in Tampa Bay’s run prevention would translate into about six points of win percentage—roughly the difference between a league-average team and one likely to make the playoffs. The year-to-date performance of the strategy almost surely overstates its effectiveness. The biggest statistical difference between the Rays’ pitching results in their “opener” games and those in contests where they used a traditional starter can be found in the share of balls put in play by opposing batters that became base hits. In the standard-starter games, it was 28.7%; in the newfangled-strategy ones, it was just 26.5%. Because pitchers tend to have little influence on whether balls hit by opposing batters (excluding home runs) are easy or hard to field, this yawning gap is probably a random fluctuation unlikely to persist into the future, rather than a durable pattern. Using Fielding Independent Pitching, a statistic based exclusively on events that are fully controlled by the pitcher and hitter (strikeouts, walks and home runs), the Rays’ pitchers’ performances were consistent with allowing only 0.15 fewer runs per nine innings with the “opener” strategy than in the rest of their games. That is only a fraction of the observed difference of 0.56. But even if Tampa Bay’s staff did not fare any better at all in the “opener” games than in other ones, it would still represent a massive coup for the team. The starters the Rays do use in a traditional fashion are extremely valuable assets: Mr Snell, for example, would probably command at least $20m a year on the free-agent market. If the “opener” approach enables Tampa Bay to replicate the production of, say, a $15m-per-season starter with a collection of relievers earning near the league minimum salary, the club can reinvest those savings into improving its offence. Any performance superior to that of the best starting pitcher the team could hope to call up from the minor leagues constitutes a free lunch. What remains to be seen, however, is whether the approach can be sustained. With MLB rosters limited to 25 slots, teams replacing starters with a surfeit of relievers either need to carry fewer hitters—which could lead to worse offence, or to more injuries among position players—or to extract more innings from each reliever. And no one knows whether pitchers accustomed either to throwing once every five days or to delivering just 10-20 pitches per appearance will be able to maintain their effectiveness and avoid injury in a more taxing, hybrid role. One solution might be to circumvent the roster-size limit by copying the Los Angeles Dodgers’ use last year of the “phantom” stint on the disabled list. With this tactic, a team declares a pitcher to be injured with the most trivial of ailments, making him unavailable for a brief ten-day period, and then replaces him with a fresh arm while he gets some much-needed rest. Whichever approach the Rays wind up settling on is likely to spread. Many tactical innovations born in Tampa Bay have now become commonplace across the league; it would surprise no one if the Astros deployed “tandem starters” in most or all games this post-season. Although the “sabermetric” movement, as quantitative analysis of baseball is known, has already yielded a series of incremental changes around MLB, today’s game would still be perfectly recognisable to a time-traveling observer transported from 1918. If the conventional starting pitcher disappears, however, baseball’s much-ballyhooed statistical revolution will finally live up to its name.