IN FEBRUARY Cyril Ramaphosa finally elbowed aside Jacob Zuma to become president of South Africa. Most South Africans were glad to be rid of the kleptocrat and his cronies. So too were foreign investors. Unlike his predecessor Mr Ramaphosa understands economics. Yet in recent months some have started to worry, in large part because of what the president has said about land reform. On July 31st he went on television to affirm that his party, the African National Congress (ANC), would amend the constitution so as to clarify under what circumstances land can be expropriated without compensation. As recently as February 2017, the ANC was against such a move. So why is it now backing the change? In the words of Mr Ramaphosa the taking of land by whites from indigenous blacks is South Africa’s “original sin”. And it is impossible to appreciate the emotional pull of land reform today without understanding the past. After the founding of the Union of South Africa (the precursor to today’s republic) in 1910, the government passed a series of laws reserving the vast majority of the country for the white minority, which then made up about a fifth of the population. From 1948, under the National Party’s system of apartheid, millions of blacks were forcibly removed from their land and dumped in “homelands”. After the advent of democracy in 1994, the ANC pledged to ameliorate this cruel legacy. It said it would use the state to buy up white farmland and give it away to blacks, provide compensation to those who were turfed off their land, and bolster the flimsy property rights of the black majority. In each of these areas progress has been painfully slow. For example, in an audit published in February the government found that blacks own just 4% of individually held agricultural land, whereas whites own 72%. The sluggish pace of change has frustrated many in the rank-and-file of the ANC, whose leaders are worried about losing votes to the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF), a hard-left black-nationalist off-shoot, in general elections next year. For the EFF, and for many South Africans who have little desire to live on a farm, the lack of land reform has also become a proxy for enduring inequality, which is partly the result of the ANC’s misrule, especially during the nine years of Mr Zuma. While land reform rarely features in a list of the ten issues that South Africans care about the most, it is hugely symbolic, and the ANC believes it has to be seen to be doing something. What will happen? Pessimists fear that any change to the constitution will usher in a broader assault on property rights and perhaps even Zimbabwe-style land seizures. But they are in the minority, at least for now. For a start, any change to the constitution is unlikely to occur before elections next year; together the ANC and the EFF may have the necessary two-thirds majority in the national assembly, but it would hurt the EFF politically to side with their bigger rivals before the ballot. And even if it were to pass next year Mr Ramaphosa has insisted that it needs to be combined with an assessment of how expropriation could be done without hurting the economy or food production. He also likes to point out that the constitution might already allow the taking of land without compensation; privately his supporters use this as evidence to argue to investors that the policy is not as radical as it may seem. This may be true. But it could create a future problem for Mr Ramaphosa should he raise hopes of improving the lot of poor South Africans, only for nothing to change in practice. Dig deeperLand reform in South Africa has been slow and inept (August 23rd 2018)