“THIS is a song that a girl took away from me, a good friend of mine. This girl, she just took this song.” Otis Redding’s playful preamble to his performance at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967 referred to “Respect”: Aretha Franklin had taken Redding’s hard-charging original and given it sass and a funky strut, shifting its viewpoint entirely from a man-of-the-house complaint to an anthem for strong women at the height of the civil-rights movement. From this point onwards, Ms Franklin became “Aretha, the Queen of Soul”. As the daughter of C.L. Franklin, a prominent preacher, Ms Franklin had grown up surrounded by outstanding musicians such as Sam Cooke, Jackie Wilson, Mavis Staples and Albertina Walker. As a soloist in her father’s choir at the New Bethel Baptist Church in Detroit, she sang sacred and gospel music from a young age and proved to be a precocious musician, learning how to play the piano by ear before taking formal lessons. She recorded her first album, “Songs of Faith”, when she was 14 years old, went on tour with Martin Luther King, Jr. when she was 16, and signed with Columbia Records when she was 19. Yet despite being a wildly talented singer with a certain mystique, commercial success was hard to come by. She recorded ten albums of jazzy standards from the American Songbook before being signed by Jerry Wexler to Atlantic Records. He understood that this bold young singer needed a suitably extraordinary band, and the strings common on her Columbia records made way for horns. The Muscle Shoals Rhythm Section, the Kingpins, the Memphis Horns, and the Sweet Inspirations defined Ms Franklin’s Atlantic singles. They were the first collaborators that brought out her best with material that finally matched her temperament and times. The resulting recordings are some of the most striking in the history of soul music. As a church-style pianist, Ms Franklin’s piano playing was never flashy like Nina Simone’s classical runs, but it was consistently original. For her, it was an instrument for rhythmic soul and, on occasion, a conduit for really memorable, if deceptively simple, solos, such as the one on “Since You’ve Been Gone”. Her ability to fuse the sacred and the secular is on full display with “(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman”. She takes Carole King and Gerry Goffin’s song and realises its aspirations. By the time the bridge comes in, the listener is both smitten and transported, unaware of where the song is taking them but happy to follow. In the hands of a lesser artist, “Natural Woman” could easily have been a dated artefact rather than a timeless and nuanced love song, completely unique in its message of mutual respect. It is telling that “Amazing Grace”, Ms Franklin’s best-selling album, was also her most personal. Recorded at the New Temple Missionary Baptist Church in Los Angeles, the album boasts a stellar backing band of Chuck Rainey on bass, Cornell Dupree on guitar and Bernard Purdie on drums. The Southern California Community Choir provided rich backing vocals to Ms Franklin’s curated set of gospel classics and reinterpretations of contemporary pop, written by artists and friends such as Inez Andrews, Clara Ward, Carole King and Marvin Gaye. These songs were more than standards. They were missives of mutual respect and love, invigorated by communal performance. Ms Franklin holds court throughout, both whipping up the congregation into a frenzy on Ward’s “How I Got Over” and soothing them into a state of profound grace with her cover of Gaye’s sublime “Wholy Holy”. Both songs articulate the guiding principles she kept throughout her career: belief in one another, the strength and righteousness of the cause, and the humbleness to follow it when in doubt. Ms Franklin knew that she had a voice on the political stage, too, and whether she was singing for black empowerment on “Young, Gifted and Black” or for Elton John’s AIDS Foundation, her tremendous voice spoke for the voiceless. “Amazing Grace” exemplifies Ms Franklin’s musical legacy. It is a showcase not only of her larger-than-life stage presence and of her voice—a voice for the ages, as distinctive as Ella’s, Billie’s, Whitney’s, Michael’s or Frank’s. What was also unique was her ability to reimagine music, to take songs and give them an entirely new meaning. She took “hardship and sorrow,” Barack Obama said in 2015, and transformed it “into something full of beauty and vitality and hope”. Her ability to express those emotions, to make you believe that she had lived the song, has made her music immortal.