LIKE many Americans, your correspondent was introduced to Neil Simon through a high-school production of one of his plays (“Brighton Beach Memoirs”, in this case). Mr Simon’s best works are so well-crafted—so tight, funny and rhythmic—that the jokes land even when they are tossed around by a bunch of clumsy teenagers. No one in the makeshift theatre left feeling dazzled by the play’s depth of character or riddled by its ambiguity, but the play did what Mr Simon’s classics always do: it had everyone laughing. Few could resist the charms of a family that was at once familiar and buffed to a high comic gloss. Mr Simon, who died on August 27th, aged 91, did not become America’s most commercially successful playwright by challenging his audiences. His works are safe spaces in which people are good, conflicts are resolved, love is sweet and humour is everywhere. Even when he dealt with subjects that might seem dark, such as war, divorce, suicide, professional failure or the depredations of the Depression, his confections promised a light-hearted escape from any real drama. His scripts often hew closely to a reliable formula: shove together some contrasting personalities, raise the heat and watch the sparks fly. Usually free from politics and social commentary, the results are about as frictionless as the many laugh-tracked sitcoms he helped to inspire. He made this work seem easy. He was remarkably prolific, churning out around 30 plays and musicals and around 25 screenplays (some based on his plays) over the course of his career. His dialogue is snappy without being distractingly clever, which gives the patter an almost effortless quality. (Mr Simon preceded Woody Allen in honing a distinctive urban-Jewish patois.) This makes it tempting to underestimate Mr Simon’s talents as a playwright, but his gifts were rare. His plays push forward with undeniable energy and momentum. His characters are unfailingly likeable, but they also leap from the page. He was eager to give audiences what they want, and succeeded. In an age when humour tends to be more nuanced and ironic, Mr Simon’s polished punchlines can feel somewhat dated. But his work has always seemed a little nostalgic. His best-known plays, such as “The Odd Couple” (1965) and his “quasi-autobiographical” Eugene Trilogy, which includes “Brighton Beach Memoirs” (1983), Biloxi Blues” (1985) and “Broadway Bound” (1986), have a wholesome, anachronistic quality to them, like Norman Rockwell prints made flesh. It is remarkable to note that “Barefoot in the Park”, Mr Simon’s first Broadway hit about a couple of adorably mismatched newlyweds, arrived on the scene after Edward Albee’s incisive “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf” in 1963. As David Edelstein at New York Magazine has observed, “Simon was retro from the get-go.” He had his own reasons for crafting escapist fantasies in which laughter deflects from adversity. Growing up impoverished in the Bronx, his salesman father regularly abandoned the family and his mother struggled to put food on the table. Mr Simon muddled through by cracking jokes with his older brother, Danny, and together they went on to collaborate on scripts and sketches for television and radio. Comedy was both a refuge and a balm, a sign of acceptance. “When an audience laughed, I felt fulfilled,” he wrote in one of his memoirs. In a way, Mr Simon’s plays—particularly his semi-autobiographical ones—can be best understood as a kind of wish-fulfillment. Against a backdrop of an often cruel world, he created havens where father knows best, the boy gets the girl, good sense prevails and a malady as boring as allergies can be made ridiculous (just try to watch this clip of Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau in the film adaptation of “The Odd Couple” without chuckling). This vision of life is delightful enough to ensure there will always be a ready audience for his work, and many more high-school productions.