BARELY a fortnight after the end of the 2018 FIFA World Cup, the 2022 edition might seem a long way off. But the wait will feel almost interminable in South America. Not a single team from CONMEBOL, as the continent’s conference is known, made it to the semi-finals in Russia. Indeed, if South America’s teams fail to lift the trophy in Qatar, they will have endured five consecutive tournaments without a victory. Bookmakers give them only a 30% chance of ending this miserable run in 2022. By contrast, between the second world war and 2002, when Brazil last triumphed in the World Cup, CONMEBOL never went more than one tournament without winning. What has caused this barren spell? It is tempting to look at the recent past and conclude that South American football has fallen into terminal decline. Brazil, five times a champion, has only reached the semi-finals once since 2002—and on that occasion got thumped 7-1 on home soil by Germany. Argentina has only made it to the same stage once since Diego Maradona, the greatest player of his generation, retired in 1994. Between them the other South American teams have only progressed to the semi-finals once in the last 40 years, when Uruguay squeezed past Ghana on penalties in 2010. Worse still, the next crop of South American stars looks less promising than the current vintage. This problem seems to exist around the world: the average age of nominees for the Ballon d’Or, football’s most-valuable-player award, is increasing, even as old stars are declining at the same rate as ever. But the worry is particularly acute for Brazil and Argentina, which selected two of the oldest squads at this summer’s World Cup. In their final knockout matches in Russia, each country fielded just one player who will be younger than 30 in Qatar. Lionel Messi, Argentina’s 31-year-old captain, has almost certainly graced the tournament for the last time. Neymar, Brazil’s 26-year-old star, will probably get one last shot at glory. The overall picture seems bleak. Yet both Neymar and Mr Messi could claim to have suffered from the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. For starters, the predecessors to whom they are so harshly compared had plenty of luck on their side. FiveThirtyEight, a sports statistics website, reckons that CONMEBOL sides would have been expected to win an average of about five World Cups between 1930 and 2014, based on their historical Elo ratings, which rank a team according to the strength of its opponents and margin of victory. In reality they triumphed nine times. The brilliance of Brazil’s Pelé and Mr Maradona helped, but so did lucky bounces and favourable decisions. (Mr Maradona once won a quarter-final against England after punching the ball into the goal.) Such fortune has deserted Mr Messi and Neymar at crucial moments. Expected goals, a statistic which estimates how many times a team ought to have scored given the quality of its chances, suggests that Argentina were slightly more dangerous in the 2014 final than eventual champions Germany, while Brazil had the better of Belgium in their quarter-final this summer. The statistic should be interpreted cautiously for individual games, since the sample of shots is small, and the model cannot account for defensive positioning. But it is not hard to imagine an alternative universe in which Mr Messi has been a world champion and Brazil made it to at least the semi-finals in Russia. Moreover, a streak of 20 years without a victory was almost inevitable at some point, thanks to the World Cup’s spectacular unpredictability. If we assume that South America’s five qualifying countries usually have a 30% chance of winning it, as the bookmakers currently suggest, then the probability that they will lose any given sequence of four in a row, as they have done since 2002, is quite small: about 24%. But over the 21 tournaments that have been held, the chances of seeing at least one streak that miserable for South America rises to 99%. Even if you are being generous, and assume that CONMEBOL typically had a 40% chance of producing a World Cup champion, the probability of a two-decade winless run happening at some point is still 90%. These calculations will do little to console a continent of unhappy fans. But despite the disappointing results in Russia, the reaction in South America has been measured. O Globo, a Brazilian newspaper, pointed out that the team has played brilliantly in the two years since Tite, the current manager, took over. A poll of the newspaper’s readers found that 80% wanted him to keep his job. During his tenure, the side lost just one of 25 matches before the quarter-final, scoring 54 goals and conceding six. Not only was the Seleção the highest-ranked national team by the Elo system before the tournament—but it had also achieved the country’s best rating since 1997 (see chart). The mid-1990s generation reached three consecutive finals, triumphing in two. The current squad is more than capable of winning a World Cup: the question is how many of them will still be stars next time around, in their early thirties. The landscape is gloomier for Argentina, which scraped through qualification with a win in the final round, and was only spared elimination in the pool stage by a late winner against Nigeria. The team is now ranked 13th by Elo, its lowest position in the 21st century. Javier Saúl, a journalist at La Nación, a newspaper, says that the quality of youth coaching has deteriorated since the departure of José Pékerman, an influential manager who spent 20 years developing the country’s youngsters before his appointment as Argentina’s head coach in 2004. (He now manages Colombia.) Yet the youth system has still produced a handful of exciting talents. Among players who will be younger than 30 in Qatar, two of the six most valuable are Argentine attackers, according to Transfermarkt.com, a football statistics website: Paulo Dybala (aged 24) and Mauro Icardi (aged 25). The dominance of Mr Messi meant that Mr Dybala only took the field for 22 minutes in Russia, while Mr Icardi did not make the squad at all. Nonetheless, they will be decent replacements for the ageing captain when he does decide to retire. Even if there is a shortage of Messi-esque superstars in the next generation, South America should be as capable as other regions of producing good international players. The strongest domestic teams might be in Europe’s “big-five” leagues, in England, Spain, Germany, Italy and France—the countries that have produced the last four World Cup champions. But Brazil and Argentina are by far the biggest exporters to these countries, with 113 and 91 players respectively in their top divisions. Hundreds more ply their trade in less fashionable European competitions, awaiting their shot in the major leagues. The other CONMEBOL members will continue to be awkward opponents to face at the World Cup. Uruguay beat Portugal this summer, before being knocked out by eventual champions France. Colombia briefly led England during a penalty shootout. Both have decent pools of talent in Europe’s “big-five” leagues: Uruguay has 35 players, Colombia has 20. Elo ratings actually show that these two countries, along with Chile, are providing more competition for Brazil and Argentina than ever before. Ecuador, Peru and Paraguay have less talented squads to call on, but have all impressed in recent tournaments. Even Venezuela, CONMEBOL’s long-suffering minnow, has finally produced a decent side, which drew twice with Argentina in qualifying. Overall, South American football seems to be in decent health, rather than withering away. The expectations for the continent’s two powerhouses will always be absurdly high. Jorge Valdano, an Argentine World Cup winner, has written of his country’s “arrogance” in portraying itself “as a predestined footballing power”. Tim Vickery, a football writer, believes that Brazil’s historical glory made its fans “inclined to believe their own myths about innate natural talent”. That confidence was based perhaps too strongly on past fortunes. But recent failures should not be cause for too much distress, either.