SOCIAL networks have a problem with trolls, spammers, bots and others who degrade the quality of interaction. Some are easier to deal with: spammers have their accounts shut down. Others are trickier: what should social platforms do about real people acting in bad faith and driving away other users? Some people believe that social networks use something called a “shadowban” to quietly silence an account. What is a shadowbanning? The currency of social networks is attention. A shadowban, in theory, curtails the ways in which that attention may be earned without blocking a user’s ability to post new messages or carry out typical actions on a network. Shadowbanned users are not told that they have been affected. They can continue to post messages, add new followers and comment on or reply to other posts. But their messages may not appear in the feed, their replies may be suppressed and they may not show up in searches for their usernames. The only hint that such a thing is happening would be a dip in likes, favourites or retweets—or an ally alerting them to their disappearance. Shadowbanning is in the news again because of a recent debate in America. A report on Vice News observed that a number of prominent conservatives and right-wing figures in America—such as the chair of the Republican National Committee—seemed to be demoted on Twitter: typing in the person’s name in the search box didn’t reveal their accounts. President Donald Trump took to Twitter to castigate the company, promising to “look into this discriminatory and illegal practice at once!” Twitter firmly denied charges it shadowbans the users: “We do not,” the company said in a statement. It is unlikely Twitter’s response will mollify those who believe that social networks express a liberal bias. A poll by Pew, a researcher, found that 85% of Republicans and those who lean Republican believe social-media sites censor political views the companies find objectionable. Facebook has attempted to sidestep these allegations by refusing to take a stance on legal speech (though it does act in the case of “inauthentic accounts”, removing them altogether). Mark Zuckerberg, the company’s boss, recently caused some controversy by saying even Holocaust denial was not a matter for Facebook to adjudicate: “I don’t believe that our platform should take that down,” he said in an interview. Yet Facebook’s algorithms must decide from millions of options what they show users in the news feed and what they hide. Certain types of media, links and text are favoured more than others. It is the absence of transparency about how such algorithms work that gives rise to conspiracy theories. Shadowbanning is one of them.