WHEN this weekend’s visit to Ireland by Pope Francis is over, people around the world will have picked up some confusing messages about a land long revered as a cradle of saints and religious scholars. On one hand, the Irish republic is much less Catholic than it was in 1979 when a previous pontiff, John Paul II, toured the island and electrified its people. On the other, the Catholic faith retains a large residual strength. For better or worse, the Catholic faith or memories of the faith still influence those who are outside its ranks. As we write in the Charlemagne column this week, the share of Irish people who say they attend mass regularly has fallen to barely three in ten from eight in ten a few decades ago. But this still makes Ireland one of the more devout nations in Europe. Among Irish citizens aged between 16 and 29, nearly 40% say they have no religion. But then 91% of Czechs, 75% of Swedes and 70% of Brits in that age bracket deny any religious affiliation. And a remarkably high 31% of young Irish people say they pray at least once a week. Even if some are fibbing, it is telling that they choose to make that claim. So where exactly does Ireland stand on the spectrum between Catholic and post-Catholic? As in many countries, the collapse in the prestige of the priesthood and of religious orders has been much more dramatic than the decline of belief itself. At Ireland’s main seminary, the number of young men who start training for the priesthood each year has fallen to single figures; when Catholic fervour was its height in the mid-20th century, it was in the hundreds. The average age for Irish priests is around 70. A desperate shortage of priests is expected. However some forms of popular religion, especially ones in which the role of priests is not central, can still attract large numbers. These include pilgrimages to holy mountains, wells and shrines. Novenas (set-piece prayers over a nine-day period) can pull in the faithful, especially if they honour a locally popular saint. Books about angelic visitations, such as those by Lorna Byrne, a Dublin woman, still command a following, even in rough parts of the city. What about the Irish intelligentsia, a world where both piety and scepticism have deep cultural roots? One would be hard-pressed, these days, to name many Irish cultural figures, writers or public intellectuals who are practising Catholics. Descriptions of Catholic piety, from the tender to the sarcastic, are a commonplace of Irish fiction and film, but Ireland has not generated Catholic writers comparable to the English converts like Evelyn Waugh or Graham Greene. One of the few public figures who emphatically identifies as Catholic, former president Mary McAleese, is also a fierce critic of the church, calling it “criminally” homophobic. Much has changed at University College Dublin, Ireland’s biggest place of [secular] higher education. It was founded in 1854 as a Catholic-friendly alternative to Trinity College, a grand old bastion of Anglicanism in the heart of Dublin. In its early years, a Catholic ethos pervaded its liberal arts faculties. These days a Catholic philosopher is a rarity. Yet currents of thought which emerged out of European Catholicism (existentialism, for example) are still more popular in the Irish academy than they would be in most Anglophone countries. This may not be a Catholic cultural environment, but it is post-Catholic in a way that France is and England isn’t. And there is one paradoxical point of agreement among many thoughtful observers of Ireland, Catholic and otherwise, from the older generation. On one hand, the collapse of the former Catholic theocracy, with its brutality, hypocrisy and cynicism, is welcome; but some good things may have been thrown out along with that filthy bathwater. Take David Norris, a senator and literary scholar who at 74 is the grand old man of Ireland’s gay rights movement (and, as it happens, a practising Anglican). He has more reason than anybody to look back on the old Catholic order, which criminalised his sexuality, with horror. But he still considers it a “pity” that some of the decency and courtesy in everyday behaviour that Catholic education used to inculcate (along with many terrible things) has vanished, and not been replaced with any convincing substitute. The net result, he and many others feel, has been a coarser and more materalistic tone in national life. Peter White, a public-affairs consultant who was also raised in Irish Anglicanism, puts it this way:  “Thirty years ago, I was an outsider amongst doctrinaire [Catholic] religiosity; now I am an outsider amongst the new Ireland’s equally doctrinaire naïve materialism. Both diminish us as moral agents.” That is not an easy viewpoint to place on any linear spectrum, or to explain to a visiting pope. But perhaps it is what makes Ireland intriguing.