A ROW over alleged anti-Semitism in Britain’s Labour Party, after rumbling on for several months, has escalated dramatically. Jeremy Corbyn, the party leader, was accused by the former Chief Rabbi of being an anti-Semite who had uttered the most offensive comments heard from a senior British politician in half a century. Labour retorted that the allegation from Jonathan Sacks, who was the leader of the Orthodox Jews in Britain and the Commonwealth until 2013, was itself an “absurd and offensive” charge. As a philosopher, public speaker and prolific author on diversity, religion and co-existence, Lord Sacks has a high international profile. In 2002 he made waves by saying that Israel’s stance towards the Palestinians was incompatible with the highest ideals of Judaism. He has argued for years that the common values of the three Abrahamic faiths will be needed to stamp out terrorism. In 2016 he won the Templeton Prize, worth about $1.5m, which rewards those who “affirm life’s spiritual dimension” through their work or teaching. So his pronouncements are taken seriously. What prompted his denunciation of Mr Corbyn was the emergence of a video from 2013 in which Mr Corbyn addressed the Palestinian Return Centre, an NGO which calls itself an “independent, non-partisan, organisation committed to advocating for Palestinian refugees, in accordance with the historical, political and legal basis of the right to return”. The Labour politician, who was not party leader at the time, referred to some people who had complained about a talk given by the London representative of the Palestine Liberation Organisation. The complainers were “Zionists” who in Mr Corbyn’s view... The Labour Party has insisted that these remarks referred to a particular group of pro-Israel activists, not to British Jews or Zionists in general. But Lord Sacks told the New Statesman, a political weekly, that this was the most offensive thing heard in high-level British politics since a speech in 1968 when Enoch Powell, a right-wing Conservative, predicted rivers of blood flowing as a result of Commonwealth immigration to Britain. That speech led to Powell’s expulsion from the senior ranks of the parliamentary opposition and his relegation to the margins of British politics. According to the rabbi’s reading of Mr Corbyn’s remarks, they suggested that Jewish Britons were “essentially alien”. Many people will agree with the rabbi in finding Mr Corbyn’s turn of phrase unacceptable. To begin with, offence can easily be caused by anything that sounds like a generalisation about a category of people from a certain race, ethnicity or religion along the lines of “the trouble with these people is that they......” And the offence is hugely magnified when it is implied because of their alleged characteristic, the people concerned don’t quite qualify as members of the national family. That said, there are of course differences of context between Enoch Powell’s diatribe and Mr Corbyn’s remarks. Mr Powell was speaking in the most public of forums, the Conservative Association of his home city of Birmingham and it is fair to assume that he consciously intended to stir up a furore. Although this does not make his tone any more excusable, Mr Corbyn was speaking to an audience of like-minded people and presumably did not expect his remarks to go any further. Over the summer, he has been fighting off a series of allegations which in some cases concern his party (notably, its reluctance to endorse the full list of “examples” that accompany a widely accepted definition of anti-Semitism) and in some case his own personal record. In 2014, for example, he appeared at an event in Tunis where, among many other things, wreaths were laid in memory of the perpetrators of the killing of 11 members of Israel’s team at the Munich Olympics of 1972. It is not suggested that he himself laid a wreath. He has insisted that he is committed to stamping out anti-Semitism and that anyone who spreads such “poison” is not doing it in his name. Despite this, he has found it hard to shake off the impression of somebody who is careless about the company he keeps. In any case whatever his failings may be, Mr Corbyn is not a racist rabble-rouser. Nor is he deliberately advocating any form of “pre-war European anti-Semitism”. But this time a much more personal apology is called for, although some Jewish Britons, including Labour supporters, are writing him off already.