WHEN the Supreme Court passed up several opportunities to rein in partisan gerrymandering, Justice Anthony Kennedy’s purported reticence was the main story. Justice Kennedy, now retired, had all but invited these cases in a 2004 decision decrying state legislatures for “rigging elections” and pleading for a “workable” standard to specify when partisan electoral line-drawing goes too far. So on June 18th, when the justices disposed of challenges to gerrymanders in Wisconsin (Gill v Whitford) and Maryland (Benisek v Lamone) on procedural grounds, without discussing the merits, many said the court was delaying a reckoning because Justice Kennedy had lost his will. But while Gill and Benisek were a disappointment for people who hoped the justices would do something to police the anti-democratic practice of politicians choosing their voters, rather than the other way around, they were no disaster. The unanimous rulings did not foreclose future claims that partisan gerrymandering violates the constitution. Gill did not even shut down Wisconsin voters’ argument against a sophisticated Republican effort to entrench Republican power in the state legislature. With only Justices Neil Gorsuch and Clarence Thomas demurring, Chief Justice John Roberts sent the case back to the lower court to give the plaintiffs another shot at proving they suffered “concrete and particularised injuries” from an electoral map that placed a “burden on their individual votes”. That’s effectively a 7-2 Supreme Court decision that partisan gerrymandering might be unconstitutional, if the right people sue. That context is crucial as drama unfolds over perhaps the most lethally effective gerrymander that any state legislature has undertaken. In North Carolina, a state with more registered Democrats than Republicans, and in which Democrats had a 7-6 majority of congressional seats in 2011, electoral lines now all but guarantee that 10 of the 13 people elected to the House of Representatives will be Republicans. One member of the state assembly arguing for this distorted map in 2016 was disturbingly up-front about his end-goal: the only reason he endorsed lines sending 10 Republicans and 3 Democrats to Congress, he said, is because he didn’t “believe it’s possible to draw a map with 11 Republicans and two Democrats”. A federal court found this map unconstitutional in January, saying that drawing lines with pure partisan intent to “subordinate the interests of non-Republican voters” violated several principles of the federal constitution. Republicans appealed this decision to the Supreme Court, which on June 25th sent the case back to the lower court for another look in light of its Gill ruling. On August 27th, the same three-judge panel came to the same conclusion. “[T]he constitution does not allow elected officials to enact laws that distort the marketplace of political ideas so as to intentionally favour certain political beliefs, parties or candidates and disfavour others”, Judge James Wynn wrote. This principle has support in the First Amendment’s rights of free speech and free association, in the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of equal protection of the laws, and in language in Article I promising that “the people” are the ones who get “to elect their representatives”. Flouting all these norms, Judge Wynn wrote, North Carolina Republicans “drew a plan” to disadvantage their electoral opponents “not because they believe doing so advances any democratic, constitutional or public interest, but because...the Republican majority ‘thinks electing Republicans is better than electing Democrats’”. That partisan move “is not a choice the constitution allows legislative map-drawers to make”. What is new in this week’s ruling from the January judgment is a more detailed discussion, forty pages long, of standing—the requirement that plaintiffs prove they have suffered actual harm. Under Gill’s requirement that voters show a “concrete” and “particularised” burden, Judge Wynn wrote, at least one voter in each district has standing. A second notable feature of the ruling is bound to be more controversial: the judges’ discussion of what to do now. The typical remedy for an illegal gerrymander is a new map drawn by the legislature or a “special master”, but ordinarily courts do not order new maps to go into effect so soon before an election. With candidates already running, ballots designed and possibly printed and voters assigned to particular districts, a new map for 2018 would upend North Carolina’s congressional voting procedures just weeks before the election. But “[t]his case presents an exceptional circumstance”, the judges wrote. The map in question has a tainted pedigree, with a previous version struck down as an illegal racial gerrymander and the 2016 revision drawn in a transparent attempt to keep the partisan advantage while not illicitly sorting North Carolinians by race. Given legislators’ clearly established bad faith, “courts generally do not afford a legislature a second ‘bite-at-the-apple’ to enact a constitutionally compliant plan”. And given that North Carolina voters have suffered under the gerrymander “for six years and three election cycles”, it may not behoove the courts to let them distort democracy a fourth time in November. The parties have until August 31st to file briefs suggesting whether the November election should go forward with the gerrymandered map and, if the answer is no, whether the legislature should be given another opportunity to draft another map that meets constitutional muster. North Carolina legislators are sure to answer “yes” to both questions; the plaintiffs will answer “no”, preferring the map to be drawn quickly by a non-partisan, court-appointed special master. The real drama will come if the court considers arguments for those positions and then insists the gerrymandered map must be immediately replaced. An emergency stay request will fly to the Supreme Court. Then the eight justices will be forced to confront an issue they largely bypassed in June: should Republican legislators be allowed to once again send North Carolinians to the polls under their highly rigged map, or should a lower court ruling tossing that map be permitted to take effect? The justices could find themselves embroiled in a dispute that could alter the balance of power in the House of Representatives. With a possible 4-4 split between the court’s liberals and conservatives before Brett Kavanaugh is confirmed by the Senate, and five votes needed to reverse a lower-court ruling, anti-gerrymandering activists see a tantalising window of opportunity.