THE sweltering summer heat in Britain may have started to affect the faculties of the country’s politicians. Barely a week goes by when the country’s roller-coaster ride of Brexit negotiations fails to take a sudden twist. Last month two cabinet ministers resigned in protest, because they thought Theresa May, the prime minister, was going soft on Brexit. This week the talk is about a no-deal Brexit and stockpiling of food. Britain does have another path, of course: remaining in the European Union. To be politically viable, this option would almost certainly require another referendum on precisely what Britain’s relationship with the EU should look like—the details of which were conspicuously absent ahead of the first vote in June 2016. Such a referendum would present three options: a no-deal Brexit; a “soft” Brexit as sketched out by Mrs May last month; or remaining in the EU altogether. How should a winner be selected in a new referendum with more than two choices? Three different methods all have their merits. A pure first-past-the-post vote, where whichever option gets the most support wins, is the simplest. However, it is likely to leave most of the electorate dissatisfied if no choice claims an absolute majority. An “alternative vote”, which takes into account the second preferences of people whose first choice was the least popular, would better reflect aggregate opinion, but ignores the second choices of people whose first pick was the winner. Finally, Peter Emerson, of the De Borda Institute, argues that the Borda tally would be the most democratic . Here voters’ first, second and third preferences are awarded three, two or one point each. The option with the greatest weighted sum of all votes cast is crowned the winner. In July a poll carried out by YouGov on behalf of The Economist put precisely this referendum question to a representative sample of Britons. Each of the three voting methods returned the same result:  to remain in the EU. That should be of little surprise. Support for Brexit began to wane as soon as the country made the momentous decision. Remainers can only hope that the extended summer heat jolts Britain’s politicians into a rethink.