“SITUKA!” sings Bobi Wine, a Ugandan singer and politician. “Rise up.” With his red beret and fiery lyrics, Mr Wine (pictured above) has become one of the most popular opposition figures in Uganda. That seems to have riled Yoweri Museveni, the ageing president. On 13th August Mr Wine was arrested violently. He was later charged with treason, alongside 32 others. Prosecutors say they threw stones at the president’s convoy. They are due back in court on August 30th. The case has rocked the country, but also stirred a sense of déjà vu. Opposition politicians have been charged with treason many times before. So have their counterparts in other African countries. Treason cases are often based on flimsy evidence and rarely lead to convictions. So why do states pursue them? The obvious reason is to control dissent. Arresting opposition figures gets them off the airwaves and the streets. In some countries a treason charge makes it impossible to apply for bail. In others the defendants may be bailed—as Mr Wine has been—but with restrictions placed on their activities. A tedious succession of hearings can drag on for years. In Zimbabwe under Robert Mugabe treason charges were slapped on opposition figures in the run-up to elections. Elsewhere, they have been used against candidates who question the result. Kizza Besigye, an opposition leader in Uganda, was charged with treason in 2016 after swearing himself in as the “people’s president” (he said the official ballot was rigged). A Kenyan lawyer with a Canadian passport was arrested for treason and deported to Canada after taking part in a similar stunt this year. Treason is also part of the deeper language of politics. Touchy presidents portray critics as enemies of the state. “Let them demonstrate and they will see who I am,” said John Magufuli, the Tanzanian president, this year; police declared an unauthorised protest an act of treason. And rulers do not like to be upstaged. Hakainde Hichilema, an opposition leader in Zambia, was arrested for treason in 2017 after his motorcade failed to give way to the president’s. Such intolerance has roots in the colonial state. The British locked up nationalist leaders such as Jomo Kenyatta, in Kenya, and Kwame Nkrumah, in Ghana, on a variety of charges. They wrote the law which is now used against Mr Wine. The space for opposition is especially tight in countries like Uganda, where the ruling party seized power by force of arms. In such places politics is fought on two fronts. There is the familiar business of arguing on talk shows and campaigning for votes; then there is the real struggle, which is for control of the army and the street. Opposition shades into resistance, which disputes the legitimacy of the regime itself. It is met with force. “The state will kill your children,” said the general secretary of the ruling party in Uganda, warning off protests in 2016. This month at least six people have been shot dead. Under Mr Museveni, the subtext of all politics is violence. Protest looks like rebellion and opposition like treason because the state cannot imagine it any other way.