LAUREN GREENFIELD is a documentarian of American aspiration and excess. Over three decades she has taken hundreds of thousands of photographs of wealthy housewives, plastic-surgery addicts, porn stars, nightclubs, strip clubs, young girls with eating disorders, children who grew up rich and children who strive to look rich. Her work is a portrait of the spread of an “image-obsessed culture” and a trove of flamboyant consumption. “Generation Wealth”, a recent documentary film, is the last part of a multimedia project of the same title that includes a coffee-table book (Phaidon, $75) and last year’s exhibition at the International Centre of Photography. This work has made Ms Greenfield’s name as the “foremost visual chronicler of the plutocracy”. The project is wide-ranging, the artist argues, because materialism has become more crass, more common and more global over the course of her career. It is “getting worse and worse and more extreme almost in an exponential way,” she says in a telephone interview. “The way media has exploded, the way globalism has exploded, the way tech has exploded—and kind of put everything I was looking at on steroids.” Through social media and reality television, images of luxury and wealth have become more ubiquitous. “This idea of keeping up with the Joneses became keeping up with the Kardashians,” Ms Greenfield says. “[And] the more you see those images the more you want those things.” While her work may seem to feed into that desire, it also casts a surrealist shadow over its subjects. The viewer understands that there is something uncanny about them even as they go about their everyday lives. Because her work is most interested in those who “desire to be wealthy, at any cost”, it brings disparate characters into conversation. In the film the viewer hears the testimony of a bus driver from Georgia whose addiction to cosmetic surgery bankrupted her and alienated her family. They observe Kacey Jordan, a former porn actress and sex worker, and her efforts to create a different life for herself (she made headlines for receiving $30,000 to “party” with Charlie Sheen). Ms Greenfield profiles a businessman living in exile in Germany after being indicted in America for his illegal financial transactions, and meets other individuals whose extravagant lifestyles were upended by the financial crash in 2008. All of these figures are reckoning with their past, either openly regretful or just painfully lost. Ms Greenfield sees the financial crisis as a watershed moment, exposing the economic forces that allowed such unchecked indulgence and rampant consumerism. “We saw…that if you lent people money they can achieve that lifestyle even if they can’t pay that money back,” she says. She wonders how much has changed. “I really saw how devastating the consequences were. I think with ‘Generation Wealth’ it seems that we haven’t learned.” Yet she is keenly aware that she is not impervious to those urges and yearnings; success is a moving target for her as much as her cast. She grew up in a high achieving, upper-middle-class family in Venice Beach—when it was still an edgy bohemian enclave—with parents who created communes and subscribed to the progressive ethos of 1970s California. Many of her peers at the private Crossroads High School in Santa Monica were significantly wealthier and more materialistic, and it is easy to see how her work has been informed by negotiating these different worlds. “Sometimes when I’m looking at something I have trouble stopping too, I want more.” she says. “In a way it drives my work to be in depth and complete and expansive; on the other hand it also leads me to overproduce.” “Generation Wealth”, on the whole, prioritises volume rather than depth; it aims for poignancy but ultimately beguiles with its perversity. It also revisits issues that Ms Greenfield has already succeeded in probing. “Queen of Versailles”, her documentary film from 2011, achieved the vision the artist claims for the rest of her work, tying together wealth, beauty, ageing, sexuality, fame and class. Ostensibly about a couple in Orlando seeking to build the biggest home in America, the film is one of the most insightful takes on the financial crisis and the American dream. “Generation Wealth” portrays shallow desires across an enormous spectrum. But “Queen of Versailles” more successfully delivered the kind of complexity and poignancy for which Ms Greenfield seems to strive.