THE election in Egypt, which begins on March 26th, will have two candidates. One is Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, the president, an ex-military man who seized power in a coup in 2013. The other is Moussa Mustafa Moussa, whose party fawningly supports Mr Sisi and who refuses to take part in a debate with the president because that would be disrespectful (see article). The election, in other words, is a farce. Why, then, should Egyptians bother to vote? Mr Sisi’s big claim is that he has restored order. In 2011 mass protests led to the overthrow of Hosni Mubarak, a dreary despot. The next year Egyptians elected Muhammad Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, who tried to grab dictatorial powers and put his Islamist chums in charge of practically everything. He failed only because then-General Sisi toppled him. All this upheaval sent investors and tourists fleeing. Mr Sisi, who won an election in 2014, deserves credit for taking painful steps to stabilise the economy, such as cutting subsidies and devaluing the Egyptian pound. Without his firm hand, his supporters say, Egypt might have turned out like war-torn Iraq, Syria or Libya. The fact that some other Arab countries are doing worse does not mean Mr Sisi is doing a good job, however. He oversaw the massacre of hundreds of Mr Morsi’s supporters, and the jailing of tens of thousands of dissidents. Serious candidates who wanted to run against him were arrested or bullied into dropping out. Those journalists who have not been locked up are barred from asking Egyptians basic questions, such as “Who will you vote for?” Freedom will follow prosperity, says the president. But he is unlikely to bring much of either by the time he is mandated to leave office in 2022. Only after blowing through tens of billions of dollars of aid from the Gulf did Mr Sisi pursue economic reforms—and then under pressure from the IMF, which bailed Egypt out in 2016. He is still throwing money at wasteful mega-projects, such as a dubious new capital in the desert, while Egypt’s schools and hospitals crumble. The army is muscling into even more areas of the economy, crowding out private firms. Mr Sisi’s vow to cut red tape has come to little. As the largest Arab state, Egypt matters. That is why the West has lavished alms and arms on it, and overlooked its leaders’ abuses. But donors’ billions have not bought stability. Islamic State continues to attack churches and mosques and behead civilians in Sinai. A third of young Egyptians have no jobs. The police and security services routinely torture the innocent. This is a recipe for more upheaval one day in the future. Not another Mubarak Egyptian voters deserve a real choice. Alas, they will not get one. (And indeed, many are so fed up with turmoil that they say they prefer the predictable rule of a strongman to the messiness of democracy.) Given that Mr Sisi is sure to win, there are several things he can do to ease the tensions that threaten to rip Egypt apart. He could order the army to put more effort into fighting terrorists and less into dodgy money-making. He could help non-crony businesses grow and hire by tackling corruption and red tape. The IMF and other donors should twist his arm to pursue such reforms. Most important, Mr Sisi should overrule his most sycophantic supporters, who want to amend the constitution to let him run for a third, fourth or fifth term. Perpetual dictators bring stagnation and repression, not peace. Consider Mr Mubarak’s 30-year reign—and the way it ended. Egypt needs a system that allows the transfer of power from one leader to the next without violence. The constitution lays one out. Mr Sisi should obey it.