ON TUESDAY, two distinguished, elderly gentlemen who live in Rome (one aged 81, the other 93) had a warm meeting at the younger one’s residence. It was the latest in a series of pleasant and stimulating conversations they have enjoyed in recent years. A few days later they seemed to be having a public misunderstanding about hell, or rather about what exactly one of them had said on that subject. The interlocutors were Pope Francis and Eugenio Scalfari, the founder of the left-wing newspaper La Repubblica who is an avowed non-believer. In keeping with Mr Scalfari’s well-established style, he avoided using notebooks or tape-recorders during his papal chat. However on March 29th, he published his own impressions of the meeting, complete with some lengthy direct “quotes” that reflected his memory of what the pontiff had said. The most controversial bit was an answer the journalist apparently received to his question on the fate of unrepentant sinners. Francis is quoted as saying something like: This caused embarrassment in the Vatican because it appeared to contradict the catechism of the Catholic church, its formal doctrinal statement. That document says: As has happened after previous meetings between Mr Scalfari and the Pope, but with even more emphasis, the Vatican press office issued a statement saying their encounter was a private conversation, not an interview. The “reconstruction” by Mr Scalfari should not be considered “a faithful transcription of the Holy Father’s words.” That will have relieved some people. In other contexts, Pope Francis has spoken of hell as a real fate that awaits those who exclude themselves from God, and he certainly has a robust belief in the need to do battle with the devil, who cunningly fills people’s heads with all manner of deceptive ideas about themselves and the world. The Vatican’s clarification was described in some press reports as a “rebuke” to Mr Scalfari. But was it? At a stretch, the pope’s reported words might be compatible with (or at least not too far distant from) the church’s standard teaching, as laid out by some of its most firmly traditionalist representatives, including his predecessor John Paul II. The Polish pontiff said hell was “the ultimate consequence of sin itself...rather than a place, hell indicates the state of those who freely and definitively separate themselves from God, the source of all life and joy.” Like most recent church pronouncements, that one makes clear that hell is not a physical location, but rather a condition. At least in that sense, hell is said not to exist. John Paul implies that it is an absence: that life can only be fully experienced in communion with God, so that conscious rejection of that communion automatically implies an end to existence in the fullest sense. This is presented as a tragic choice rather than divine retribution. In any case, none of these arguments will distract Pope Francis from leading the elaborate and beautiful services that mark Easter weekend. In Christian teaching, Easter Saturday is often associated with “the harrowing of hell”—in other words, the moment when, having faced death himself, Christ descends to the world of the dead and frees the people who have departed before him.