“YOU might find yourself saying ‘I am not a stranger here.’” The comforting words, printed in a pamphlet for “The Family of Man” at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, would have been read by more than 250,000 visitors to the exhibition in 1955. As cold-war anxieties roiled, making conformity seem like an important tool for survival, the show presented a compendium of 503 photographs from 69 countries, taken by 273 photographers. The walls were lined with pictures of French brides laughing on swings, small boys playing with marbles in Java, and Dutch mothers nursing their children. For Edward Steichen, the curator (and a photographer in his own right), it mirrored what he called “the essential oneness and goodness of man”. More than 60 years later, being a stranger is precisely the point of another photography show, “Another Kind of Life: Photography on the Margins” at the Barbican Centre in London. Though “The Family of Man” was a resounding success (viewed by more than 10m people, it toured the world for eight years before retiring to Clervaux Castle in Luxembourg where it is still on display), some critics lambasted it for making humanity seem like one homogeneous mass. Roland Barthes, a philosopher, scorned its “conventional humanism”. To him, it was a dull collection of photographs in which everyone lives and “dies in the same way everywhere”. “Just showing pictures of people being born and dying tells us, literally, nothing,” he wrote. “Another Kind of Life” is also a group show, though not nearly as large. It includes works by 20 photographers, each with a carefully partitioned space. There are bikers roaming the highways of America, Soviet hippies in bell bottoms posing amid apocalyptic landscapes (pictured, by Igor Palmin), and Teddy Boys in post-war Britain, their hair brylcreemed architecturally to offset their beetle-crusher shoes. One room shows Daido Moriyama’s pioneering pictures of Tokyo’s seedier zones, all tattoos, yakuza gangsters and nightclub performers. In another there’s Walter Pfeiffer’s glimpse of Zurich’s gay scene in the 1970s, a heart-breaking depiction of the steadily wasting face of his beautiful young transsexual friend, Carlo Joh. Teenage drug addicts get as much attention as circus performers. The survivalists, monks, hermits and runaways of Alec Soth’s “Broken Manual” sit near Paz Errázuriz’s photographs documenting the precarious lives of a community of transvestite sex-workers in Chile under Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship in the 1980s. In one of the first rooms viewers are introduced to Diane Arbus’s unnervingly direct portraiture of muscle men, nudists and circus performers. While some praise her for finding the “familiar in the strange” and “unusual in the ordinary”, others, like Susan Sontag, say she simply exploits them—making specimens of her subjects. Sontag, for whom this kind of documentation violates its subject, charges Arbus with committing voyeurism that lacks empathy: “By seeing them as they can never see themselves, by having knowledge of them they can never have; it turns people into objects that can be symbolically possessed.” Each snapshot is a violent attack: we “take” a photograph, and with it we snatch a little bit of someone’s soul. But this show is not guilty of mindless, detached voyeurism. The photographers engaged for months, years and sometimes decades with their subjects. In the 1960s Danny Lyon joined the Chicago Outlaws, a motorcycle gang, spending four years drinking and riding with them (the photographs would go on to inspire Dennis Hopper’s 1969 film, “Easy Rider”). Dayanita Singh’s touching portrait of the life of Mona Ahmed, a eunuch from New Delhi who lived much of her life in a cemetery, owes its power to their 30-year friendship. Ms Singh’s respect for her subject is apparent; the portrait rests lovingly and steadily on Ahmed’s emotion-laden face as she listens to her favourite song. “Another Kind of Life” never tries to define what an “outsider” actually is—but that is why it succeeds. By looking at these images viewers are reminded that the world is more than just the familiar kinds of lives they already know, and that people obviously do not live and die in the same way everywhere. Photography like this lets the magnificent complexity of that world all be seen. “Another Kind of Life” is the perfect postscript to Steichen’s neatly curated behemoth. Instead of arguing that everyone shares the same experiences, it revels in revealing the riotous and unwieldy chaos of human existence. “Another Kind of Life: Photography on the Margins” is on display at the Barbican Centre in London until May 27th