EVERY generation of artists has brought its own sensibilities and experiences to the depiction of canonical Christian stories. Giotto, an Italian painter, set Bible scenes in medieval Tuscany. Rembrandt gave his a hint of mercantile 17th-century Amsterdam. “Mary Magdalene” is similarly a retelling of some of the faith’s main events from a 21st-century perspective, one that takes the original texts seriously but sets out to peel away aeons of sexist prejudice. It is a bold undertaking, particularly for film-makers with an impressive record otherwise but no experience of spiritual subjects. At the heart of “Mary Magdalene” is the idea that Jesus’s most important female follower should be restored to a central, unique place in what might be considered the founding narrative of Western culture. The New Testament has much to say about this enigmatic figure, but is by no means comprehensive. It says that she, along with several other women, accompanied Jesus and the male disciples as he preached and healed. Her relationship with the Messiah apparently began when he delivered her from many demons; she watched the crucifixion and was the first to see and speak with him after his resurrection. But apart from that startling scene, the Bible tells us little about the content of her relationship with Jesus. The film’s declared aim is to exonerate Mary Magdalene from a centuries-old charge, and a common misconception. In the sixth century, the Roman church opined that she was the same person as the unnamed sinful woman who, in another New Testament scene, wipes the feet of Jesus with tears and perfume (the Orthodox church never accepted this fusion). This papal pronouncement was not the same as declaring Mary Magdalene a prostitute. In many medieval accounts, she is described as a promiscuous, wealthy woman, though not necessarily one who took money for sex. But that perception passed into Catholic teaching and lore. Portrayed by a dreamy, brooding Rooney Mara, the film’s Mary Magdalene has unique spiritual talents. She understands the message of Jesus, including the bitter truth that he must be crucified, in a way that the male disciples often do not. (It is an understanding she shares with Mary, the mother of Jesus.) Jesus’s male followers expect him to restore an earthly Jewish kingdom: Mary is the first to comprehend that the “kingdom of God” is a spiritual state which must prevail not through force of arms, but in the human heart. That is a hard notion to portray cinematographically, to put it mildly. But it makes a nice change from a lot of fashionable thinking about Jesus, as exemplified by “Zealot”, Reza Aslan’s best-selling book, which recasts Christianity’s founder as a Jewish nationalist firebrand. That interpretation could have made for a gripping, action-packed film, so it is to the credit of Garth Davis, the director, that “Mary Magdalene” opts for a more nuanced message. It is a shame that there are only so many ways to portray the inner workings of the heart; the film features more than its fair share of loaded silences and meaningful glances. But the film does include impressively dramatic scenes, such as when Jesus drives the traders from the Jerusalem temple, where animal sacrifice is happening on an industrial scale; and—of course—the crucifixion. (There is a decent effort to convey the elusive Christian idea that the self-sacrifice of Jesus is an ultimate blood offering that renders unnecessary the religious slaughter of animals.) The three-way relationship between Jesus (played as a powerful, charismatic but quite earthy figure by Joaquin Phoenix), Mary Magdalene, and Peter (Chiwetel Ejiofor), the wayward, impulsive disciple, is also a source of constant interest. Mr Davis regards this more flawed, human Peter as “spiritually detached” where Mary is empathetic and wise. Likewise Judas (Tahar Rahim) is not an evil betrayer but a misguided figure who thinks he can trigger a Jewish revolt. Some of this interpretation—especially Peter sparring with Mary Magdalene—reflects the Gospel of Mary, a religious text which came to light in 1896. But Mr Davis is adamant in rejecting one popular school of revisionism: the heroine’s bond with Jesus is not erotic, even subliminally (even though Mr Phoenix and Ms Mara are dating off-screen). That differentiates the film from, say, Martin Scorsese’s “Last Temptation of Christ”. In an age when almost all intense relationships are credited at least with an unconscious physicality, some will question whether Mr Davis has succeeded in portraying a purely spiritual level of communication. The film’s abiding impression is of a ponderous mystery, complete with miracles and exorcisms, unfolding gradually amid brownish hills and grey lakes. Some viewers may complain that there isn’t enough suspense or excitement to hold their attention. But the real value of “Mary Magdalene” lies not in its status as a Hollywood blockbuster, but as a piece of art that opens up part of the basic Christian story and points to details left overlooked. By no means all viewers will accept the film’s interpretations, but most will see the narrative with fresh eyes.