IT SEEMS almost quaint to focus on the officials elevated to leadership positions under Xi Jinping, China’s president. Mr Xi, after all, is now being called the Communist Party’s core, helmsman of the country and the people’s leader—all titles associated with Mao Zedong. Mr Xi’s thought has been written into the constitution, to which all members of the party must pledge allegiance. State media report on him in ever more fawning terms and pay less and less attention to everyone else. Television news showed delegates to the annual session of the National People’s Congress (NPC), China’s ersatz legislature, weeping for joy when Mr Xi’s re-election as president was announced. His unusually bellicose speech to the NPC, on March 20th, in which he warned the world that “not one inch of the motherland’s territory can be carved off”, was rapturously received. Yet even a one-man show needs its stage hands. Mr Xi has assembled a new team, anchored by two officials who will go a long way to determining the success of his rule. One is known for his intellect, the other for his ruthlessness. Mr Xi dispensed with several political norms during the recent NPC session. In addition to doing away with term limits for his own post, he also in effect scrapped the unwritten retirement age for senior officials, to secure the return to government of Wang Qishan, a close ally. Mr Wang has earned a fearsome reputation over the past five years as the head of the agency prosecuting an unprecedentedly harsh anti-corruption campaign. Since he will turn 70 in July, he stepped down last year from the Standing Committee of the Politburo, China’s most powerful decision-making body, in keeping with convention. But Mr Xi has brought him back to the centre of politics as vice-president. Mr Wang is the first person who is not a member of the Politburo to hold the job since 1998. In Mr Wang’s hands, the vice-presidency will go from being a largely ceremonial role to one with significance. He is expected to be the point-man on relations with America, at a time when Donald Trump is pushing the United States and China ever closer to a trade war. Mr Wang has, over the years, earned a nickname as China’s chief firefighter for his adept handling of incendiary problems. In 1999 he helped resolve a big bankruptcy; in 2003 he led the response to an outbreak of the SARS virus in Beijing; and during the global financial crisis he was the main economic liaison with American officials, building up a network of contacts in Washington which should prove useful in his new role. If there were any doubts about Mr Wang’s clout, seating arrangements during the NPC dispelled them. He was placed immediately next to the Standing Committee, as if he were the eighth member of the seven-man group. Mr Xi’s imprint on China’s economic bureaucracy was also unconventional. The most important official, apart from the president himself, will be Liu He, a mild-mannered policymaker who has risen from relative obscurity to become Mr Xi’s trusted adviser on the economy. Mr Liu is credited with persuading Mr Xi to play closer attention to the economy by convincing him that, if there were a crash, he would be remembered for it, rather than for any positive achievement. Now appointed as one of four deputy prime ministers, Mr Liu, who has a master’s degree in public administration from Harvard University, will lead a committee created last year to oversee the central bank and various other financial regulators. Normally, anyone with that kind of administrative responsibility would have experience managing a large bureaucracy. Mr Liu, in contrast, spent much of his career in the bowels of the state-planning system. From Ivy League to leading small group Over the past five years he has become far more prominent, thanks to Mr Xi’s backing. The head of a party “leading small group” to spearhead economic reforms, he was the architect of a policy to cut excess capacity in the steel and coal industries. Although critics grumble that private rather than state-owned firms bore the brunt of enforced closures of mines and mills, the strategy has worked, as prices have recovered and margins have risen for the surviving producers. Mr Liu is also widely believed to be the man behind an article in 2016 in the People’s Daily, the party’s main newspaper, which called for more vigorous tactics to pare back the economy’s debts than the prime minister wanted. With Mr Liu already supervising the central bank, many had thought that Mr Xi might go one step further and put him directly in charge of the People’s Bank of China as governor, succeeding Zhou Xiaochuan, who has retired after 15 years as its boss. Instead the reins were given to Yi Gang, the bank’s deputy governor for the past decade. That, again, was a break with convention, since Mr Yi is only a stand-in member of the party’s central committee. Those hoping that Mr Xi will push through reforms to relax government control of the economy welcomed the appointment of Mr Yi. His foreign academic background—a PhD in economics from the University of Illinois and several years of teaching at Indiana University—had previously been seen as limiting his career prospects. Mr Xi, apparently, is more open-minded than that. And Mr Yi’s academic writings, dating back to the early 1990s, are also, by Chinese standards, relatively liberal. In one paper he discussed the dangers of the government implicitly guaranteeing the entire banking system. But trying to read Mr Yi’s appointment as a victory for free markets is a stretch. It looks more like a victory for technocratic competence. He has managed the day-to-day operations of the central bank in recent years. One reform he championed involved improving its ability to lend confidence-boosting dollops of cash to sound banks when markets get skittish, which in turn has allowed regulators to be tougher with the most indebted companies without causing systemic distress. He has also overseen reforms to make the yuan’s exchange rate a little more flexible. However, on all big decisions, notably on whether to loosen capital controls, Mr Yi will be little more than an adviser. One important figure will remain in place, at least in theory. Li Keqiang was reappointed for a second term as prime minister, after several years of rumours that he might be replaced. By all appearances, though, he has been marginalised. The prime minister has traditionally looked after economic policy. But in Mr Xi’s first term the party’s leading small groups, over which he had direct control, took over much of that responsibility. In Mr Xi’s second term, with his allies further empowered, Mr Li seems to have been reduced to prime minister for cutting red tape. Those looking for disagreement among the legislators gathered in the Great Hall of the People, a Stalinist building in the heart of Beijing, had to squint to find even the faintest glimmer. The appointment which faced the stiffest opposition was that of the education minister: a mere 97.9% of delegates voted for him. Mr Xi, for his part, was reappointed unanimously. He will rely on his closest allies, above all Messrs Wang and Liu, to advance his goal of making China richer and more powerful. Mr Xi will no doubt get credit for successes. Apportioning blame for any failures will be trickier.