IN OFFICES around the world, the scandal over Harvey Weinstein’s depredations has obliged men to rethink their interactions with women. Many are struggling to decipher where the bounds of propriety lie (handshake or kiss?). In Hollywood itself, the furore has ruined reputations and ended careers. And film executives have been forced to reconsider not just workplace mores but the stories they choose to tell. It is a disorienting moment, but a promising one—for female artists, the studios themselves and for their viewers. For such a faddish industry, Hollywood can be amazingly ossified. Female characters may no longer be tied to train-tracks and rescued by mustachioed heroes, but they still tend to be stereotyped and marginalised. Male actors do most of the talking; women are far likelier to take their clothes off. That is in part because conventional wisdom among decision-makers holds that big-budget films with female leads are liable to underperform. Not coincidentally, from boardroom to writers’ room to director’s chair, the vast majority of those decision-makers are men. That the Academy Awards on March 4th will feature a woman nominated for directing is a rarity; that a woman has been nominated for cinematography is a first. Now the #MeToo movement has begun to redistribute power in Hollywood. Instead of being stymied by harassment, some women are being promoted; more are being given a chance to direct. At the same time there are signs that the studios are becoming squeamish about gratuitous sex and misogynistic violence, two staples of the silver screen (see article). To sceptics, those changes might look like woolly political correctness, or tokenistic positive discrimination. On the contrary, they are likely to be as good for movie-makers’ profits as they are for female talent. That is because Hollywood’s chauvinistic assumptions about audience tastes are based less on scientific fact than on prejudice. Although women account for half of cinema-ticket sales in North America, for example, executives were so convinced that female-led action flicks were a turn-off that they hardly made any. The recent success of “Wonder Woman”—the third-highest-grossing film in North America last year—indicates a neglected market for strong female characters. Similarly, the triumph of “Black Panther”, a chart-topper in the United States and abroad, has discredited another Hollywood shibboleth, namely that pictures with black casts could not succeed overseas. Happily ever after Perhaps female and minority viewers were once more tolerant of films that offered only caricatures of themselves, or omitted their likenesses altogether. Probably, many always felt short-changed, but Hollywood was too self-involved to notice. Now, however, the studios seem poised to learn from the hits these audiences turn out for, rather than dismissing them as outliers. Meanwhile women writers and directors are beginning to provide actors with more complex female roles—a trend that the scandal has accelerated. All this matters beyond Hollywood, because its products are not like other industries’. Television and films have vast power to shape the way their audiences see themselves and other people. If the Weinstein episode circuitously leads to more rounded depictions of women on screens around the world, this grim saga might find a sort of happy ending.