MUCH has been made of Xi Jinping’s consolidation of power, which began long before the National People’s Congress (NPC) agreed in March to abolish term limits on the presidency. During his ascent, Mr Xi has displayed ruthless skill. The anti-graft campaign he launched in 2013 is what Kevin Rudd, a former Australian prime minister, calls a “masterclass in political warfare”. In addition to reducing theft, Mr Xi used it to remove potential rivals, install loyalists and cement his own power at the top. A new super-agency, the National Supervisory Commission, will take the campaign outside the Communist Party to educational institutions, hospitals, village governments and more. Far more than any previous member of China’s supposedly collective leadership, Mr Xi personally heads a score of top-level committees and commissions. In mid-March Xi Jinping Thought was incorporated into the constitution. The Chairman of Everything, as another Australian, Geremie Barmé, calls him, looks bent on staying in power throughout the 2020s—and perhaps for life. That much has now sunk in in the West, which had not wholly grasped Mr Xi’s—and China’s—direction of travel. The question, as he enters his second term, is what he intends to use his power for. Mr Xi is no banana-republic dictator. He still holds the Communist Party, and not himself, as both pinnacle and embodiment of authority in China. Mr Xi, whose father was a fellow revolutionary with Mao Zedong, longs for a party driven by purity and zeal, as it supposedly was in the 1950s (along with a bent for bloody purges). He has warned that cynicism and corruption inside the party threaten not only the country’s economic transformation, but the party’s very survival. To save the party is to save China. Mr Xi’s historic mission, therefore, is to safeguard the party’s monopoly. At the party’s five-yearly congress in October, he declared that the “principal contradiction” facing Chinese society was no longer getting enough food on the table. It was, rather, aspiring to a better quality of life in the face of untrammelled development. One-party rule will survive the growth of a vast middle class, Mr Xi seems to be saying, only if it can provide what the middle class wants: better schools, cleaner air, good health care. To do that requires a fundamental shift in the state and party—and only Mr Xi, with all his extra powers, can force through such a change. This overhaul, referred to by the wishy-washy slogan “Beautiful China” involves tougher trade-offs than the flat-out dash for growth of the past. How much growth do you sacrifice to protect the environment? Should subsidies go to the backward west of the country or to upgrade industry in the more prosperous east? The agenda will also be hard to fulfil. Not least, a decentralised bureaucracy is accustomed to pursuing breakneck local growth—and damn the consequences. Mr Xi seems to understand the challenges. A big push is under way to streamline and centralise the bureaucracy, separating policymaking from its execution. At the annual gathering of the NPC in March, a new team of ministers and advisers was unveiled that stressed technocratic competence. (It may be one-man rule, but Mr Xi needs good underlings.) In the provinces the reward structure for officials is being reconfigured. You really can get ahead on your environmental record. There is a snag with much of this, however. At their heart, Mr Xi’s moves aim to restore the Communist Party to a centrality that it has not enjoyed for years. He is doing that by seizing the state’s policy machinery for the party. That undoes administrative changes made two decades ago by the reformist prime minister of the time, Zhu Rongji, intended precisely to separate party and state, professionalise government and spur market-led change. Minxin Pei of Claremont McKenna College in America says millions of lower-level officials resent the new orthodoxy. They hate the compulsory ideological indoctrination under Mr Xi that recalls the era of Mao. The unchecked powers of the anti-corruption campaign strike fear. And the centralisation of authority makes it hard for the party’s entrenched system of patronage to operate. Paralysis is one plausible outcome, Mr Pei contends. But Mr Xi can hardly back down now. This suggests broader worries about the momentum of reforms, argues Mr Rudd, now the head of the Asia Society Policy Institute in New York. Five years ago China launched an ambitious blueprint to move from low-wage manufacturing and preferential financing for state enterprises to a model based on domestic consumption, services and a more vibrant private sector. Yet progress has been marginal, in part because of Mr Xi’s obsession with party control, which hampers and intimidates administrators. The NPC has just promised to re-emphasise the market. Mr Xi’s policy speech in early April at the annual Bo’ao gathering, China’s Davos, will give a powerful clue about whether his inner control-freak will leave any slack in the system for reformists. Peak power Once you accrue power, says Mr Pei, you have to show what you can do with it. It is, in other words, delivery time. Mr Xi will not only be judged on domestic challenges, including today’s loyalists jockeying for position in a post-Xi era. Three external uncertainties are mounting, each of which will also test Mr Xi’s leadership. The first is handling the summitry around North Korea, whose leader, Kim Jong Un, paid a visit to Mr Xi in Beijing this week (see article). The second is America’s increasingly aggressive demands on trade, which are a terrible backdrop for domestic reforms and threaten to back China into a corner. A third and growing worry for Mr Xi is America’s new Taiwan Travel Act. It encourages high-level exchanges with Taiwan, to which China could feel bound to respond forcefully. Missteps risk being magnified. And that is the downside of being the Chairman of Everything: you will get blamed for everything that goes wrong.