ONE of the most striking things about Steven Soderbergh’s proudly pulpy new thriller, “Unsane”, is that the end credits last about 20 seconds. In place of the usual ten-minute inventory of assistants, visual-effects companies and catering armies, there is just a short list of names—and at least one of those is the director’s own alias. Under the pseudonym of “Peter Andrews”, Mr Soderbergh shot the whole of “Unsane” on an iPhone. Such technological experiments are what we have come to expect from him. When he made “The Good German” (2006), which was set in the 1940s, he used only camera lenses which were available at the time. “Mosaic”, a recent project, made use of an app to experiment with branching narratives. But it’s still not entirely clear why the man behind such glossy blockbusters as “Ocean’s Eleven” (2001) should have eschewed big crews and expensive cameras on this particular project—and the pictures on screen aren’t always entirely clear, either. At a time when television dramas look so sumptuous, is it wise to make a feature film that looks so cheap? Mr Soderbergh seems to have reversed Michelle Obama’s motto to come up with his own cinematic strategy: “When they go high, we go low.” Still, mobile phones do have some relevance to the plot of “Unsane”. Its heroine is the snazzily named Sawyer Valentini, played by Claire Foy, the star of “The Crown” (with an American accent which is as flawless as her Queen Elizabeth impersonation). She has just started working for a bank in a new city because she was being stalked in her home town. A security consultant, played by an uncredited A-lister, warns her that the more time she spends on her phone, the more easily her stalker can track her, but Sawyer can’t resist Skyping her mother during her lunchbreaks and using dating apps to pick up men. Moving 400 miles to escape a predator is all very well, it seems, but giving up her phone is out of the question. What happens next is that Sawyer visits a psychiatric hospital to talk to a therapist. She knows it’s irrational, she says, but she sees her stalker wherever she goes. In a nightmarishly brisk sequence, the therapist takes this confession as a pretext to have Sawyer committed to the hospital, and she finds herself being marched from its swanky hotel-like lobby to the dark corridors and dingy dormitories behind it. Here, again, mobile phones come into play. Sawyer is convinced that one of the orderlies is actually her stalker, and, whether or not she is delusional, she is desperate to be released. Getting hold of a phone is a matter of life and death. Maybe, then, Mr Soderbergh had strong narrative reasons for shooting “Unsane” on equipment he could stuff in his pocket at the end of the day. But the result is that the film looks distractingly ugly, with some harsh, skin-bleaching lighting, and the kind of amateurish angles you get when you prop a camera on a chair to take a family photograph with a timer. The screenplay, by Jonathan Bernstein and James Greer, deserves better. Make no mistake, “Unsane” is a ludicrous, lurid B-movie, but as ludicrous, lurid B-movies go, it’s a treat. The twists and shocks are plentiful, the dialogue is spikily funny, and Ms Foy’s fiery performance helps to make Sawyer a terrific, no-nonsense character: brave and defiant when she is face-to-face with a deranged killer, and abrasive to the point of being obnoxious when she isn’t. There is some pointed satire beneath the guilty pleasures, too. Five years ago, Mr Soderbergh’s “Side Effects” lampooned the pharmaceutical industry’s exploitation of mental illness. “Unsane” is similarly cynical about private hospitals. Why has Sawyer been locked in one, she asks? A fellow patient, played by the immensely likeable Jay Pharoah, has a simple answer: “You got insurance, they got beds.” Echoes of Alfred Hitchcock and Stephen King ring through this story of paranoia and obsession, but there are louder echoes of Jordan Peele’s Oscar-nominated smash, “Get Out”. That was another quick-witted, low-budget horror-thriller which balanced good old-fashioned scares with incisive social commentary. And just as “Get Out” posited that some white people’s hearty public approval of black people can be a form of racism, “Unsane” argues that some men’s adoration of the women in their lives can easily tip into possessive insanity. The difference between the films is that Mr Peele was obviously intent on making “Get Out” as polished as it could possibly be, whereas Mr Soderbergh was more interested in making “Unsane” quickly and thriftily (you might say that he was phoning it in). His film is still nastily enjoyable, but it would have been better still with higher production values—even if the end credits had run a few minutes longer. “Unsane” premiered at the Berlinale. It is released in Britain and America on March 23rd