ON MARCH 14th, one month after terrified teenagers streamed out of Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School during a massacre in Parkland, Florida, that killed 17 people, thousands of students across America walked out of their schools to stage a peaceful protest against gun violence. Youthful energy turned quickly to sombre remembrance outside a high school on Manhattan’s Lower East Side, as 17 students took turns standing on a chair to announce the name and age of a victim. As a cold wind swept the sports field where the teens huddled—holding hands and linking arms—the first volunteer called out, “Jamie Guttenberg, 14 years old, ENOUGH”. The crowd repeated the words and stood for one minute of silence. Seventeen minutes later, after each victim had been recognised and mourned, a student spoke of text messages he had received on February 14th from his friend caught in the Florida shooting, who survived but had watched classmates die. Another noted that though the morning was dedicated to remembering the dead, “to mourn alone is to limit ourselves to thoughts and prayers”. In the coming weeks and months the agenda must turn to action. “We can rise together to end these atrocities,” she said, but “each and every one of us must act”. This closing admonition seemed to allude to a familiar phenomenon: school shootings inspire immediate outpourings of grief and calls for stricter gun regulation, but before long, the shock recedes and political will for change evaporates. In 2013, months after a gunman killed 20 six- and seven-year-olds and six staff at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, new firearm regulations failed to pass in the Senate. Even a bill to expand background checks for gun buyers fell a few ayes short. Barack Obama said the vote marked “a pretty shameful day for Washington” and attributed the demise of the legislation to a lobbying and advertising blitz from the National Rifle Association (NRA). In the aftermath of the Parkland tragedy, the NRA is reprising its old role with predictable alacrity. “I’ll control my own gun, thank you”, the organisation tweeted the morning of the walkout. School shootings are tragedies, the NRA says, but armed security in and around school buildings is the only way to avert them—or stop them once they begin. With this proposal, the group has a new ally in Donald Trump. The president’s main talking point since Parkland has been the virtues of training select teachers to bring guns with them into the classroom and wield them in the event of trouble. As many as 40% of America’s teachers could be taught to carry weapons, he has speculated; and just by paying them “a little bit of a bonus”, schools will become “hardened targets” and deter would-be shooters from planning to kill children. When Mr Trump recently went off script and declared his support for raising the minimum age to 21 for buying long guns like the AR-15, the weapon the 19-year-old gunman used in Florida, the NRA swooped in and fixed that with one oval-office intervention. Mr Trump has since backed off the idea, saying he will wait and see how the NRA’s lawsuit against Florida’s new age limits goes. If the well-trod path toward the futility of gun regulation has any chance of breaking new ground, the remarkable activism of social-media-savvy students at Marjory Stoneman Douglas and beyond will be key. This time seems to be different: students are muscling their way into public view and insisting on change. Just as important, they and their adult supporters recognise how steep the climb is toward tougher gun laws—they have already put two more protest dates in the books. On March 24th, half a million protestors are expected to converge in Washington, DC to "march for our lives". And on April 20th, students nationwide are planning to hold another walkout—one that will focus on legislative fixes and may take students out of their schools for quite a bit longer than 17 minutes.