NOT since the creation of the World Trade Organisation in 1995 has a free trade deal involved so many countries. On March 21st in Kigali, the Rwandan capital, 44 African leaders signed an agreement to create a “Continental Free Trade Area” (CFTA). The pact will eliminate tariffs on 90% of products, liberalise services and reduce non-tariff barriers. A second phase of negotiations, to begin later this year, will focus on investment, competition and intellectual property rights. Enthusiasts say that free trade will join up Africa’s fragmented markets, ignite industrialisation and create jobs. But 11 African countries, accounting for 37% of the continent’s GDP, sat out. Among them were Nigeria and South Africa, the two largest African economies. Why? The basic problem is that the agreement is incomplete. Negotiations only began in 2015. Countries have not yet decided which goods will be excluded. Nor have they finalised key annexes to the text: in the words of the South African trade minister, “the chapter on the rules of origin is an empty circuit board”. That makes it hard for South Africa to sign just yet. It needs to run the text by two government departments, for legal reasons. But its leaders are keen. Cyril Ramaphosa (pictured right), the new president, has put his name to the Kigali Declaration, a political statement to support the CFTA. “Africa is a continent of traders,” he said the day before. The deal is “a new dawn”. Nigeria is a harder case. It is not implacably opposed. It chaired the negotiating forum and hopes to host the CFTA secretariat. Its Federal Executive Council had approved the signing of the deal. But Muhammadu Buhari, the president, cancelled his flight to Kigali at the last minute. There is an election next year, when he may run again, and he needs to keep powerful interest groups onside. Labour unions have called the trade deal a “radioactive neo-liberal policy initiative”. The manufacturers’ association has warned that imports from other continents will be traded under African labels, undercutting Nigerian business. This is not all a paranoid fantasy. Thai rice, repackaged as local produce, is already smuggled in huge quantities through Benin. Yet most of the confusion around the deal comes from a lack of consultation, which is the main cause of ire. Chiedu Osakwe, Nigeria’s chief negotiator, says that many concerns are “caught up in the whole populist globalisation blowback” (union leaders approvingly cite the policies of Donald Trump). Given time, he thinks, Nigeria will come round. The hesitation of Africa’s big beasts is therefore more about process than content. They have robust legal frameworks and strong domestic associations (leaders of small, authoritarian states have a freer hand). That said, the deal is not without flaws. Free traders point out that African trade is concentrated in a few products. Countries may be tempted to exclude these from any pact so they can keep earning tariff revenues. Interventionists note that trade patterns will not change until countries shake off commodity dependence and give a helping hand to their industries. And much hinges on measures to reduce non-tariff barriers, like delays at border posts, which are the biggest obstacles to trade. Scepticism is warranted, and patience required. But also, in this continent of traders, there is some room for hope.