APPOINTMENT television is in decline. Enter the appointment smartphone show. HQ Trivia, a zippy quiz show launched in August, springs to life on hundreds of thousands of hand-held devices in America at 9pm eastern time on weekends, and twice each weekday (see chart). Scott Rogowsky, its goofy presenter, offers a share of the cash prize to whichever viewers get all of 12 (or sometimes more) multiple-choice questions right; they have ten seconds to answer each one. Players typically compete for a pot of $5,000. But on Sunday nights the prize, and the number of players, jumps. On Oscars night earlier this month, six quizzers out of 2.2m split a $50,000 reward. Nearly 1.8m players crashed out on question three (bird’s-nest soup, a Chinese delicacy, is made from actual bird nests, not fried noodles); 800,000 stuck around to watch the finale.Even when the prize is small, players take the competition seriously. Google searches spike whenever the show is on. Victors post clips on social media. Co-workers, kith and kin play together, huddled around an iPhone as their grandparents were at their age in front of the telly when “The $64,000 Question” was on. Most internet TV has comprised studio-style programmes that happen to be hosted on an online platform (think Bloomberg’s 24-hour news channel on Twitter). These sell ads and sponsorships, as will HQ if it is to make money. But its founders, Rus Yusupov and Colin Kroll, believe they have hit upon something more interesting, and lucrative—participatory appointment TV, which turns viewers into the show. Investors agree. This month Intermedia Labs, HQ’s parent firm, raised $15m from venture capitalists, valuing it at $100m. This may seem a lot for a company with no revenue. But advertisers covet the sort of audience HQ Trivia attracts. Most are young; many do not watch TV, or own a set. By comparison, the median age of viewers of Fox News, the most-watched pay-TV channel in America, is 68 years old. Audiences are shrinking even for big events like the Oscars, which drew 26.5m viewers this time, 20% fewer than last year. Crucially for advertisers, HQ Trivia’s viewers are always watching intently. A ticker displays a live tally of participants and Mr Rogowsky calls out players’ usernames to keep them engaged. Players know straight away if they answered correctly, and how many people didn’t. Losers’ laments fill the screen. Predictably, HQ Trivia has already spawned copycats in America and China (one such is pictured above). Online giants like Facebook may get in on the act. Mr Yusupov looks unfazed. Intermedia Labs is building the “future of TV”, he declares confidently. Watch this home screen.