THERESA MAY kicked off a dramatic week on March 12th with her Commons statement on the poisoning of Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia by a powerful nerve agent in Salisbury, a quiet cathedral city. The prime minister pointed her finger directly at Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, saying that either the Russian state had sanctioned the attack or it had lost control of a deadly poison. She gave the Russians until the end of the following day to produce an explanation before she concluded that Britain had been the victim of “an unlawful use of force”. This marked the return of the feisty politician who all but disappeared after June’s election disaster. Jeremy Corbyn, Labour’s leader, was feeble in his response. He called for dialogue with Russia and then veered into an attack on the Tories for taking money from Russian billionaires. Labour backbenchers were embarrassed at his misjudgment of this national moment. The exchanges also set in motion a process that put Salisbury at the centre of an escalating diplomatic row. It is as if a bunch of John le Carré characters had invaded a Trollope novel and put Barchester at the heart of an espionage thriller. Mrs May won early support from the leaders of France, Germany and the European Union. Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, expressed Germany’s “full solidarity”. Emmanuel Macron, the French president, promised to stand behind Britain as it prepared “to take concrete measures against Russia’s breach of international solidarity” (though later France said that it needed definitive evidence before taking any action itself). America’s response was also strong. After some hesitation that prompted Russian state television to claim that “Trump is ours”, the president said he would support Mrs May “all the way”. On March 14th his ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, declared that America stood in absolute solidarity with Britain. Mr Putin made no attempt to meet Mrs May’s deadline. Sergei Lavrov, his foreign minister, dismissed Mrs May’s allegations out of hand, accused her of behaving like a Soviet-era prosecutor, and refused to co-operate unless he was given access to the nerve agent. Russia combined defiance with self-pity. How dare Britain insult a great nation? The Russian embassy mocked Mrs May’s assertion that it was “highly likely” that Moscow was responsible for the attack by creating a hashtag, #HighlyLikelyRussia, and suggesting that it was “highly likely” that Russia was responsible for the recent snow. On March 14th Mrs May set out Britain’s response in a second statement. Britain will expel 23 Russian diplomats identified as intelligence operatives, the biggest expulsion for 30 years. It will freeze Russian state assets known to be supporting dubious activities. It will strengthen its border defences against suspicious characters. It will not send dignitaries to the football World Cup in Russia this summer. Mrs May’s speech was forceful. She was careful not to offer something she could not deliver and she laid the foundations for increased pressure through co-ordinated action with allies. Her biggest omission was any plan to target the wealth of London-based Russians linked to the Kremlin. Mr Corbyn’s reply did nothing to allay his own moderate MPs’ fears that foreign policy could be his Achilles heel. He refused to condemn the Russian state directly for the Salisbury attack. He focused obsessively on the management and control of chemical weapons as if the problem were the device used to commit the crime, not the crime itself. He echoed Russia’s demand for access to the nerve agent. He even criticised the government for cutting the Foreign Office budget, as if more money would have prevented the attack. Labour pains A Corbyn spokesman then further muddied the waters. He refused to say whether Mr Corbyn accepted Russian responsibility for the attack, questioned the security services’ competence (“there is a history between WMDs and intelligence which is problematic, to put it mildly”) and suggested that a former Soviet Union country other than Russia might have been behind the attack. “The break-up of the Soviet state led to all sorts of material ending up in random hands”, he said. This failure to put Labour firmly behind the prime minister underscored a huge concern about a possible Corbyn premiership. This is that Mr Corbyn’s long history of making excuses for anti-Western regimes, particularly Russia, make him an unreliable custodian of British national security. It may also have reignited the civil war within the parliamentary party that was halted by Mr Corbyn’s election success. A string of Labour MPs stood up to support Mrs May rather than their leader. Even before Mrs May spoke, the government said it would reopen inquiries into the deaths of other Russian émigrés who have died in Britain in mysterious circumstances. Some newspapers reported that there had been as many as 14 suspicious deaths. On March 12th another was added to the list: Nikolai Glushkov, a former head of Aeroflot, Russia’s national airline, and a close associate of Boris Berezovsky, an oligarch who fell foul of Mr Putin and was later found dead in his home west of London. Why has Britain responded more assertively to the Salisbury incident when it has turned a blind eye to similar ones in the past? Part of the answer is that it fits into a menacing pattern of an out-of-control state acting abroad without sufficient pushback. Partly it is because this atrocity was so egregious. Three people, including a police officer, are in critical condition, 40 more are being monitored for health problems, and parts of Salisbury have been sealed off. And some in the British establishment also feel guilty about the weak response to the murder of Alexander Litvinenko in 2006, when Britain dragged its feet and then expelled just four diplomats. Keeping up momentum after this week will be hard. The West, including Britain, has a sorry recent history of behaving like a paper tiger when confronted with Russian aggression, as Crimea and Ukraine show. Mr Putin is good at playing on divisions and using oil and gas as a weapon. Russia also has two other things on its side. One is that, since it is impossible to prove the Russian state’s complicity, it is easy to drop two questions into the conversation. Why would Mr Putin go after such a low-level operative? And why would he do so just before an election and not long before Russia hosts the World Cup? The second is Brexit, which means that Britain is engaging in tense negotiations over its departure from the EU just when it needs its European allies’ support. There are plenty of ways in which Mrs May could trip up in the coming months. Critics say she should have been tougher still, especially over money. Yet this week at least marked a start of efforts to hold a rogue actor to account for attempted murder. It has also reopened divisions inside the Labour Party. It is a long time since Mrs May has looked so strong at home—and Mr Corbyn so weak.