PHILIP HAMMOND, the chancellor, is doing what he can to shake his dull-as-ditchwater reputation. As is his wont at fiscal events, he peppered his Spring Statement, an update on the economy delivered to Parliament on March 13th, with wisecracks. “Mr Speaker,” he said, waving his finger at the Labour front bench, “if there are any Eeyores in the chamber, they are over there. I, meanwhile, am at my most positively Tigger-like today.” Labour’s numbers, he said, were the product of a “briefing from Russia Today.” It is easy to see why Mr Hammond was in a good mood. The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), the government’s fiscal watchdog, gave him improved economic forecasts. The OBR expects public borrowing over the next four years to be £145bn ($200bn), £12bn less than was predicted last November. Britain’s ratio of public debt to GDP is now expected to be lower next year than it was in 2016. Falling public debt represents “a turning-point in the nation’s recovery from the financial crisis of a decade ago,” Mr Hammond boasted. Britain’s public finances are indeed looking better, for a number of reasons. Since becoming chancellor in July 2016 Mr Hammond has resisted growing calls, including from within his own Tory party, to ramp up spending on things like local government and welfare. Tax revenues are also healthier. Since the Brexit vote in June 2016 the economy has performed better than most forecasters expected. The OBR once predicted GDP growth of 1.4% in 2017, but it now sees growth of 1.7%. Britain’s four biggest taxes—income tax, national insurance, value-added tax and corporation tax—make up two-thirds of total receipts. All are returning revenues bigger than was expected shortly after the referendum. Corporation-tax receipts are expected to have risen by 4% over the past year. The weakness of sterling has meant that firms’ foreign earnings are worth more. And revenues from income tax and national insurance have been boosted by a strong labour market. Unemployment is close to a four-decade low. Nominal wage growth seems to be inching up as firms are forced to compete more for workers. Employees in the finance and insurance sector, on whom the government relies heavily for income tax, saw their pay increase by 7% in nominal terms last year. Low unemployment, as well as Britons’ willingness to take on debt, has also increased consumer spending, which explains why VAT revenues have also been strong. But is Mr Hammond’s boasting justified? The economy has outperformed the gloomy forecasts made just after the referendum. But it is by no means a star. On the same day that Mr Hammond delivered his statement, the OECD club of rich countries forecast that this year Britain will have one of the slowest-growing economies in the G20. Some businesses are delaying investment as they wait for greater clarity over Britain’s future trading arrangements with the European Union. Brexiteers had hoped that a strong global economy and weak currency would produce an export boom. Britain’s exports have improved, but less so than the G7 group overall. The upshot is that Britain’s public finances are less healthy than they would be without Brexit. Shortly after the referendum, the OBR forecast that borrowing would rise by more than £100bn; the £12bn reduction in forecast borrowing is relative to that much higher level. In other words, the extra borrowing expected as a result of Brexit is still vast—just not quite as vast as originally predicted. Before the referendum Britain expected to eliminate its budget deficit by 2020. The government now hopes to do this by the mid-2020s. Even that looks optimistic, however, since a rapidly ageing population will weigh ever more heavily on public spending. In any case, progress on the public finances has come at a cost. Public services of all sorts are in trouble. Prisons are out of control. Rough sleeping has tripled since 2010. Cuts to the working-age welfare bill are expected to trim the real incomes of some of the country’s poorest by over 5% in the next few years. Local government is in a tight spot: in 2016-17 two-thirds of councils that provide social care drew on their reserves to meet spending commitments. What is needed in the long term are higher taxes to combine high-quality public services with sustainable public finances. Even some Tories are coming around to this idea. Unless Mr Hammond does the same, few Britons will smile with him.