TWO weeks ago, Germany’s chancellor seemed to be in trouble. Her Christian Democrat (CDU) party and the more conservative Christian Social Union (CSU), its Bavarian sister, hated the bland coalition deal she had just forged with the Social Democrat (SPD) leadership. They also hated the fact that she had conceded the mighty German finance ministry to her prospective centre-left partners to help them win a membership vote, the result of which is due on March 4th. And they hated the fact that she had not brought any prospective successors into the cabinet. Since then, however, Angela Merkel has rewritten the final chapters of her chancellorship. At a CDU conference in Berlin on February 26th Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, her preferred candidate to be general secretary (and, many reckon, to succeed her as chancellor) was elected to the job with 98.9% of votes. The party also opted for a new “grand coalition” with the SPD by a similar margin. In her speech, Mrs Merkel blamed her poor election result in September on Unbehagen, or malaise, about the capacity of the German state in moments like the refugee crisis, about technological change and about an unpredictable wider world. It is still possible that the SPD members will vote against the coalition deal. In that case Mrs Merkel would probably form a minority government, though it would be unlikely to last a full four years. Or she could try to force new elections. But it looks more likely that grass-roots Social Democrats will—very reluctantly—back the deal. If so, Mrs Merkel’s fourth term as German chancellor will begin around mid-March. Several new figures would then mark German politics. Olaf Scholz, the fiscally conservative SPD mayor of Hamburg, would be finance minister and thus dominate discussions with Emmanuel Macron, the French president, on euro-zone reform. The pugilistic Andrea Nahles, the incoming SPD leader, would strive to give her party new definition in the Bundestag. Mrs Kramp-Karrenbauer, the moderate former minister-president of the Saarland, would launch a programme of renewal in the CDU. In her speech at her party’s conference in Berlin she committed to making it once more “the place where there’s a real contest”. Meanwhile Jens Spahn, an ambitious MP from the Rhineland, would become health minister. The expected contest between Mrs Kramp-Karrenbauer and Mr Spahn to replace Mrs Merkel—who most people in Berlin assume will step down before the next election, due in 2021—would pit two starkly different visions of the CDU/CSU alliance against each other. The former, aged 55, belongs like Mrs Merkel to the party’s Christian-social wing. She is a social conservative and economic centrist who as leader would probably prefer yet another coalition with the SPD. By contrast Mr Spahn, who is only 37, and is gay, belongs to the CDU’s socially liberal wing, yet has won over the party’s conservatives with a tough line on immigration and integration, and would most probably seek to form a new government with his friend Christian Lindner of the pro-business Free Democrats, if the numbers permitted. He admires dynamic young centre-right European leaders like Sebastian Kurz in Austria and Leo Varadkar in Ireland. For Europe a new German “grand coalition” would be preferable to the alternative: more muddle. The continent’s mightiest economy has now gone five months without leadership. Mr Macron and others want to do a preliminary deal by June to strengthen the euro zone before its next crisis. A “no” from the SPD membership would make a new government before the autumn unlikely. But even a “yes” would leave big questions open. Would SPD control of the finance ministry move Germany much towards French proposals on the integration of the euro zone? Would Mrs Kramp-Karrenbauer consolidate her position as Mrs Merkel’s preferred successor? Would Mr Spahn stay loyal or agitate against the chancellor? Mrs Merkel’s position is secure for now. What comes next is less certain.