XU YONGHAI’S flock gathers weekly to worship in his small studio apartment in west-central Beijing. On a chilly winter morning a dozen people climb the concrete stairs to his door, dump their coats on his Snoopy bedsheets and gather around a table laid with tea and Bibles. The service begins with some devotional songs, accompanied by music from a battery-powered speaker. The pocket-sized gadget packs up halfway through the medley, forcing the pastor to dig out a spare. Many tight-knit services such as this one take place across China each week. The small congregation meets without the permission of the Three-Self Patriotic Movement, a government umbrella under which all China’s Protestant congregations are supposed to huddle. It meets on Fridays rather than Sundays, an arrangement considered less likely to provoke officials. Authorities know what goes on and occasionally post a watchman to a security box outside the building. But they tend not to interfere, says Mr Xu, because they know that all his congregation does is “read the Bible”. Chinese Christians were thought to number about 70m in 2010 and are probably more numerous now. Perhaps only a minority of them worships in government-sanctioned churches, in which the party vets both clergy and services. Most attend unregistered ones, which vary from cramped house groups such as Mr Xu’s to thriving congregations of hundreds—and in a few cases thousands—of believers. Some of these churches are aggressively persecuted, their ministers imprisoned. But most persist, watched warily by officials but not exactly clandestine. Gatherings in this “grey zone” are where China’s Christians may worship most freely, says Fenggang Yang, a scholar of religion at Purdue University in Indiana. God- and state-fearing Although Christians are growing more numerous, the wriggle room allowed to them is shrinking. Of most recent concern is a revised set of religious regulations that came into force in February. The old rules had stopped short of explicitly outlawing informal religious gatherings, but the new ones state more clearly that unregistered churches are beyond the pale. Fearing a clampdown, some bigger churches have split their congregations into small house groups that they think officials will find less bothersome, says Fan Yafeng, a pastor and legal scholar. Others are appointing chains of substitute ministers and managers to keep things running should the main ones be arrested. Restrictions on religious practices in China have ebbed and flowed since 1979, when the officially atheist Communist Party began reopening churches, mosques and temples that had been shut down under Mao. When Xi Jinping became the party’s general secretary in 2012, optimists dared to wonder if further loosening was on the cards. Instead Mr Xi’s administration has emboldened an intolerant party faction that was already dominant before his elevation, whom Mr Yang describes as “militant atheists”. At a big conference in 2016 Mr Xi warned that some religious beliefs could be a conduit for “foreign infiltration”. Party bigwigs have taken to insisting that religions in China must be “sinicised” and occasionally wheel out pliant bishops, imams and monks to echo that view. One result has been a series of harsh crackdowns on the religious, especially in a handful of provinces where informal worship is most common. Top of the party’s concerns are creeds it does not consider indigenous to China and which it blames for fuelling secessionism among ethnic minorities. Uighur Muslims in the western province of Xinjiang are suffering especially egregious security measures—ostensibly aimed at fighting terrorism—that include high-tech surveillance and sweeping detentions of men deemed dangerously spiritual (pettier restrictions have included a ban on religious-sounding names and the wearing of “abnormal” beards). Increasingly, intolerance is also affecting better-integrated Muslims, such as the Hui. Last summer Global Times, a state-owned newspaper, reported that officials in Qinghai province had stripped loudspeakers from more than 350 mosques, apparently to tackle “noise pollution” caused by the call to prayer. Christians are also under suspicion, though for slightly different reasons. They are many times more numerous than Muslims and are predominantly drawn from the Han, China’s majority ethnicity. The party worries that Protestantism is spreading quickly among young, educated urbanites whose talents it needs to help modernise the country, says Ian Johnson, author of a recent book about religion in China. A few years ago authorities tore down vast numbers of crosses from both registered and unregistered churches in Zhejiang, a relatively devout eastern province. At least one big church has lately been dynamited, ostensibly for lacking the proper planning permission. Last year officials undertaking poverty relief in Jiangxi were reported to be urging locals to replace pictures of Jesus in their homes with portraits of Mr Xi. Some of the new regulations look designed to account for changes to society since 2005, when the previous version was promulgated. They tighten control over religious content online, for example, and seek to make it more difficult for China’s increasingly wealthy believers to go to religious conferences or workshops abroad. But they also impose stiff fines on people who organise unregistered religious gatherings, and on landlords who allow their properties to be used for them. How much difference this will make in practice remains a matter of much debate. The likelihood is that enforcement will vary greatly by province, and that the largest unregistered congregations are the ones most at risk. Wang Yi, the outspoken pastor of a big Protestant church in the south-western city of Chengdu, says that in recent months police have been dropping in more often than usual, and that about 20 congregants have been invited to “have tea” with the authorities (a polite form of intimidation). Ezra Jin of Zion Church, a middle-class congregation of about 1,600 in Beijing, says that officials have become fussier about old but rarely enforced rules prohibiting under-18s from receiving religious instruction. Not everyone stands to lose out. Carsten Vala at Loyola University in America says the new rules clarify that some registered religious groups are allowed to do social work, such as running nursing homes. And nothing in the revised regulations limits or extends the vast extralegal powers that officials have always been able to wield by invoking national security. Yet as Mr Xi consolidates his power over the party, and the party’s power over government, nervousness is growing. No one is as sure as they used to be about the direction China’s religious life will take.