THE Winter Cherry mall in Kemerovo, a Siberian mining city, advertised itself as a family-friendly entertainment centre, complete with a cinema, trampolines and a petting zoo. On Sunday, when flames engulfed the four-storey building, it was filled with parents and children enjoying the first days of the school holidays. Some fled the fire by jumping from windows; harrowing footage from inside the building showed others trying to break through locked exit doors. Many did not make it out. As of late Monday, at least 64 people were reported dead in one of the deadliest fires in recent Russian history. Reports from Kemerovo suggest the final toll could be higher. The tragedy appears to have been the result of corner-cutting on the part of the mall’s owners, as well as incompetence on the scene. Witnesses told Russian media that the fire alarm had failed to go off. Investigators say a security guard shut off the public-announcement system alerted to the fire. Four people have already been detained in connection with the incident. Russia’s Investigative Committee (RIC), a federal agency that looks into serious crimes, says it wants to question the mall’s owner. As the fire burned, the authorities were initially slow to respond. The region’s long-serving governor, Aman Tuleev, did not appear at the scene of the tragedy. When the story broke on March 25th, state television largely stuck to regular programming; one channel aired a scheduled broadcast of a documentary about Vladimir Putin. That night’s news broadcast on Channel One, an agenda-setting programme watched by millions, reported the fire as only the fourth story of the night, after a dispatch about Mr Putin’s victory in last week’s presidential elections and two segments peddling conspiracy theories about the poisoning of Sergei Skripal, a former Russian spy, in Britain. The tragedy will test the government’s ability to manage a national incident, coming just a week after Mr Putin’s re-election. By March 26th the scale of the disaster had begun to sink in. Regional officials declared three days of mourning. Mr Putin ordered the government to organise compensation for the families of victims. National channels picked up the story, running wall-to-wall coverage. Some observers on social media wondered whether the safety problems were the result of a system whereby officials see regulations not as a way of making things safer but as a tool to hound businesses, many of which pay bribes to be left alone. “Serious violations took place when the mall was being built and as it was functioning,” said an RIC spokesman. As investigators seek those responsible, tales of unfathomable grief continue to trickle out of Kemerovo. A large number of the victims were children. Aleksandr Lillevyali had dropped his three daughters, a pair of 11 year-olds and a five year-old, off at the fourth-floor cinema to watch the cartoon film “Sherlock Gnomes”. He had been waiting for them on the first floor when the fire erupted. One of his daughters called to say that she smelled smoke and that the doors to the cinema were blocked. “I yelled into the phone, telling her to try and get out of the room,” he told Meduza, a Russian news site. “But I couldn’t do anything myself—the fire was already in front of me.”