THE first duty of a newly elected Speaker of the chamber of deputies, Italy’s lower house, is to visit the president in his palace on the Quirinal hill. On March 24th Roberto Fico of the maverick Five Star Movement (M5S) was chosen for the job. But instead of following custom by slipping into an official limousine for the one-kilometre journey, Mr Fico walked up with his partner. His election signalled not just a change of style, but a shift in the political landscape that shortened the odds on an all-populist government emerging from the consultations that President Sergio Mattarella is to initiate after Easter. Mr Fico, who began in politics as an environmental activist, won with the help of the populist-right Northern League and Silvio Berlusconi’s conservative Forza Italia party. Yet more strikingly, his colleagues in the Senate voted to make Elisabetta Casellati the new Senate president. Ms Casellati was the candidate of an electoral alliance including the League and Forza Italia. She is known for her loyalty to Mr Berlusconi, whose scandal-strewn past represents much that the M5S was founded to oppose. Ms Casellati’s election was anything but a victory for the former prime minister, however. Mr Berlusconi, whose party trailed the League in the election, had backed another senator. Just to show who now led the right, Mr Salvini refused to support him, instantly torpedoing his chances. The former prime minister fumed that it was an “act of cold hostility”. Mr Berlusconi’s troubles continue to deepen: on March 26th he was ordered to stand trial, accused of paying witnesses to lie for him in earlier proceedings in which he was acquitted of paying for underage sex. A coalition of the League and the M5S, which won the most votes of any party at the general election on March 4th, could offer the country stability. It would have clear majorities in both houses. But it would send tremors of apprehension through markets and European chanceries, for it would put into office two parties that have vowed to defy the euro zone’s budget-deficit limits and whose electoral pledges, if implemented, would add tens of billions of euros to Italy’s already worryingly high public debt (more than 130% of GDP). The League and the M5S have very different policies and constituencies. The M5S swept the south in the election. The League, despite Mr Salvini’s efforts to make it a national party, still has many supporters who view southerners with disdain. He and Luigi Di Maio, the M5S’s leader, both know they could face mutinies if they link up. But the two men have developed a rapport. On March 26th Mr Salvini expressed qualified backing for Five Star’s pledge of a universal basic income. Italian government talks are unpredictable, however. Other possible combinations include a coalition with Forza Italia; a link-up between the M5S and the centre-left Democratic Party (PD), even a broadly based government of national unity. In any case, an all-populist coalition could give itself a limited mandate to alter Italy’s hotchpotch of an electoral law, enact a few popular reforms and then go back to the country. Their aim then would be to wipe Forza Italia and the PD off the map and install a new, populist two-party system.