ROUGHLY a fifth of all coral in the world has died in the past three years. Some experts believe that there is now just half the amount of coral that was in the oceans 40 years ago. The northern third of Australia’s Great Barrier Reef has lost more than a third of its coral since 2015. Coral is neither a rock nor a plant, but an animal. A mound of the stuff is made up of thousands of tiny invertebrates called polyps, that can be anything from a few millimetres to several centimetres wide. The reefs it builds support entire marine ecosystems, so its decline is a major problem. What on earth is going on? Litter is one problem. The debris blocks sunlight, and bits with sharp edges sometimes cut coral tissue. Plastic rubbish often collects and then spreads harmful bacteria. A study published in Science, a journal, in January reports that nine out of ten corals observed with plastic lodged on them show signs of disease. Silt from shoreline construction smothers coral. Overfishing is another problem, as the removal of fish from the food chain allows the spread of large fleshy algae whose growth can crowd out coral. Such algae thrive on nutrients in sewage and farm runoff. Those pollutants also bring bacteria which can kill coral larvae as they are swimming to find a spot to settle permanently. The biggest reason for coral’s decline, however, is rising water temperature. Heat appears to render it more vulnerable to viruses. More importantly, warming can ruin the symbiosis between coral and its main food, the microalgae that live on and inside its tissue. In warming water, microalgae overproduce sugars and toxins. This leads coral polyps to spit them out. But because the polyps need these microalgae in order to survive, without them they turn white, a process known as bleaching. They can then soon die. In addition to this, the build-up of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is also increasing the acidity of seawater, which makes it harder for coral to generate the calcium carbonate it needs for its skeletal structure. Coral reefs limit shoreline erosion, reduce the destructive power of storms, and provide food and shelter for marine life that feeds millions of people. So a total collapse of coral-reef ecosystems would be very serious. Various solutions have been mooted. One involves cooling the reefs by deploying large, floating shade cloths. Another proposes pumping colder water from deeper parts of the ocean nearby. Numerous laboratories have begun selective breeding of corals to produce hardier varieties. Others are trying to use genetic engineering to the same end. Some experts worry about such interference, saying that a coral created for heat tolerance might have other problems, such as a greater vulnerability to viruses. Opposition to such breeding is weakening, however. Coral needs all the help it can get.