THE role of the Auditor is usually dropped from productions of Samuel Beckett’s “Not I”. The Irish playwright never found a way of making this silent, gesticulating character work alongside the monologue of the disembodied Mouth, suspended in the darkness eight feet above the stage. But by having a British Sign Language performer (BSL) in the shadowy role, a radical new staging of the play at the Battersea Arts Centre in London might just have cracked it. Jess Thom, a writer and actor who has Tourette’s syndrome and experiences thousands of involuntary motor and vocal tics each day, has chosen to perform “Not I” partly out of a desire to “claim Mouth as a disabled character”. Frustrated by the limited range of theatre accessible to disabled artists and audiences, Ms Thom set about opening up Beckett’s text. She and her director Matthew Pountney and BSL director Deepa Shastri worked with Charmaine Wombwell, a BSL performer, on a new BSL translation of “Not I”. It must walk a fine line between conveying the meaning of Beckett’s text to deaf audiences and retaining an essential element of the monologue in performance: the fact that it’s delivered so fast that you have little hope of catching it all anyway. The character of Mouth lives in isolation and silence aside from the handful of occasions in which she is overcome and debilitated by a “stream of words” that set her “mouth on fire”. That resonates with Ms Thom as someone with Tourette’s, but it’s relevant to plenty of other audiences too, deaf people included. For Ms Thom, “Not I” is about “communication, language and exclusion”. Considering the nuances of the BSL translation only served to enrich her thinking about this complex and rarely performed play. Ms Thom’s production bears the hallmarks of an ethos known as the “aesthetics of access”. It brings discussions of access, and therefore deaf and disabled artists themselves, into creative decision-making from the very start of a project. Rather than bolting on BSL interpretation, audio description or captioning after the fact, these techniques are treated as tools for storytelling as fundamental as lighting, sound or costume design. Now ubiquitous among disabled artists and those making theatre for disabled audiences, this way of working was born of financial necessity. It was pioneered by Jenny Sealey, a director, not long after she took over the top job at Graeae, a disabled-led theatre company, in the late 1990s. Ms Sealey couldn’t afford to pay BSL interpreters or audio describers for her next production, so opted to pre-record and project the signing, and have the actors speak the stage directions along with their lines. The production was a success, and in the nearly two decades since then Ms Sealey has continued to innovate. Her “Reasons to Be Cheerful” (2010), a musical based on the songs of Ian Dury & the Blockheads that recently completed its second major tour, is a case in point. It featured captioning in the style of a 1970s slideshow that was helpful for deaf audience members, while at the same time encouraging a singalong that enhanced the rock-gig atmosphere of the show. Central to the “aesthetics of access” is the idea that greater diversity on and off stage is beneficial not only for deaf and disabled artists and audiences, but for the culture in general. Theatre is storytelling, and the more experiences you showcase, the better the stories. The mainstream theatre world is waking up to the possibilities of such an approach. Six English theatres, led by the New Wolsey in Ipswich, are taking part in Ramps on the Moon, a programme of work that sees them taking turns to produce a large-scale touring show whose cast and creative team are 50% deaf or disabled. This year’s production, at the Nottingham Playhouse, is “Our Country’s Good” by Timberlake Wertenbaker, about a group of convicts rehearsing a play in the newly established penal colony of Australia. Some of the six deaf actors in the cast deliver their lines in English and BSL, while others sign their lines while a hearing actor speaks them. Either way, the interpreting is conceived to make sense within the logical framework of the relationships in the play. The involvement of the deaf actors enhances the production artistically. Underpinning all this is what’s known as the “social model” of disability. A product of the British disability-rights movement in the 1980s and 1990s, it says that individuals are disabled not by their impairments but by society’s failure to consider difference. Learning about the social model transformed the way Ms Thom saw herself. “That’s such a radical idea as a disabled person: to suddenly realise that you are not the problem,” she says. Instead of focusing on “fixing” or “curing” disabled people, society needs to remove the environmental, structural and attitudinal barriers that keep them from taking part. Ramps on the Moon is seeking to do just that, both by improving pathways into the arts for deaf and disabled people and seeking to bring about structural change in cultural organisations. The project has just had funding from Arts Council England confirmed for the second half of the programme, meaning that there will be three more shows from participating theatres, as well as three more years of hard work behind the scenes sewing inclusion into the very fabric of these institutions. If the project is a success, mainstream audiences can expect to see a lot more theatre informed by the “aesthetics of access”, and a much more diverse range of performers on stage. “Not I” runs at the Battersea Arts Centre until March 17th, followed by a national tour. “Our Country’s Good” runs at the Nottingham Playhouse from March 9th to the 24th, followed by a national tour.