NILS FRAHM is unlike most musicians. A couple of years ago, his life was a flurry of activity and new releases. Audiences were enamoured with his unique sound, and he had a number of critically-acclaimed albums under his belt: “Felt”, named after the material used to dampen the sound of his piano strings, in 2011; and “Spaces”, an ethereal mix of live classical compositions and electronica, two years later, to name but a couple. He had produced the award-winning film score to Sebastian Schipper’s one-take thriller “Victoria”, curated a weekend-long show at the Barbican Centre in London and set up a universal day of worship for his favourite stringed instrument—the piano. Then Mr Frahm went quiet. He retreated from the online world to experience “the luxury of being forgotten”, and kept his cultural consumption to a minimum to “feel hungry in a society which has everything”. He meticulously watched his time and that of those around him, aware of the finite nature of both. When his mood was low, he resisted the temptation to post a tweet or a snippet of a song to come, knowing the instant feedback would do little to fulfil his long-term goal of only offering audiences something that was complete. Accepting “there was no communication to do” was, he says, “pure luxury”. Time was spent working, and occasionally sleeping, in his studio—a newly renovated acoustic chamber in The Funkhaus, a multi-purpose recording space that once powered East Berlin’s communist state radio. He tinkered with the wiring and the woodwork, then built his own pipe organ and mixing desk. When he wanted a specific sound, Mr Frahm would seek it out. He travelled to Mallorca, an island in the Mediterranean, to bounce sounds off an amplified stone well. Together these locations formed a vast improvement on his former space, a bedroom studio that, after more than a decade of melody-making, now felt empty, every drop of inspiration sucked from its walls. The solitude was strategic, he admits. He knew the wait would build tension and intrigue. It would also—if successful—prove a point: that musicians do not always need to be present to show their worth, and that the studio is an important place for exploring creativity undisturbed. Mr Frahm bemoans the way musicians now use a computer to emulate the sounds of real-life instruments because the software is cheap. Far better to save for something that has soul than cut corners because the resulting sound, either wired up to technology or left in its purest form, is then unique. His hope is that by making the studio and the craftsmanship centre stage, other artists will be inspired to do the same. Mr Frahm ended his long hibernation with his seventh album, “All Melody”, released last month. It is little surprise that the result is intense and absorbing. Opening with “The Whole Universe Wants to Be Touched”, the haunting choral overtures of Shards, a London-based group, grip the listener. Fans are jerked through the oscillating electronic beats of “#2”, transported along the rippling melodies of “My Friend the Forest” and plunged into the ethereal pipes of “Sunson”. Despite the variety of genres and instruments used, the effect is of one long, continuous song—albeit with some interesting interludes. “Human Range” offers a desolate soundscape, smoke-filled and suspect. Yet “Forever Changeless”, the piano solo that follows, brings the listener back and easily unwinds those six minutes of unease. The album is supported by a tour, his first since 2015, which began in Berlin in January and will end in Osaka in June. His instruments split the stage in two halves, offering a window onto the two personas that make up his work. To the left Mr Frahm, the solitary thinker, studiously crafts melodies on “desks” of polished wood and worn-out keys: a miniature Danish piano he picked up a couple of years ago and an old harmonium. To the right is Mr Frahm, the scientist. With frenetic fervour he darts back and forth, twisting dials and pressing keys so that sound is bent and reshaped. The ebony bulk of a grand piano is majestic, yet it is also made into a drum-kit for Mr Frahm to beat against hypnotically. His technical brilliance was clear at the Barbican Centre last month. Mr Frahm has a peculiar ability to transport an audience from techno club-nights to delicate piano solos with ease. His meandering jokes did an excellent job of cutting through the intensity; witty and human, they revealed yet another side of the same man. But though the performance was enchanting, the setup of the stage occasionally left the listener feeling like an outsider looking in. It became a spectacle of his creative process, rather than an immersion in the sounds themselves, and so prevented the sort of deep experience one might have expected given the emotionally charged nature of his recorded work. In any case, witnessing his distinct world in action somehow felt enough.