THE British prime minister, Theresa May, said on March 12th that either the poisoning of a former Russian spy and his daughter was “a direct act by the Russian state” against Britain, or the Russian government had lost control of its nerve-agent programme. Sergei Skripal was an officer in Russia’s military-intelligence services and for years a “mole” working secretly for Britain’s MI6. In 2004 he was caught by the Russians and jailed for 13 years. In 2010 he was released in a spy swap and settled in the British city of Salisbury. Then on March 4th he and his daughter Yulia were found on a bench in the city, having been poisoned with a rare nerve agent. They are still critically ill. Harsh measures against the Kremlin’s critics are not unusual. But under an informal understanding dating from the cold war, spy agencies do not usually make physical attacks on the other side’s intelligence officers, especially after a spy swap. Mr Skripal should have been off-limits. So why was he made a target? If Mrs May is right then there are several possible explanations. Perhaps Mr Skripal had trodden on some toes in Moscow by re-entering the spying game. Or perhaps Russia has chosen to mount a bold challenge to Britain, to highlight the hollowness of the government’s tough talk about Russia. A third possibility is that the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, wants to send a message both at home and abroad about Russian power. Or someone within the Russian system has done this without Mr Putin’s direct involvement. Foreign counter-intelligence services have long been worried about a growing overlap between Russian spy agencies and organised crime. As Mrs May pointed out, the use of a nerve agent suggests government rather than criminal involvement, but even in official circles there is now a blurred distinction between acts carried out directly by the Russian state and those carried out by people acting in its name. Impunity is often now interpreted as an instruction. Russia denies any involvement in the affair. But Mrs May said her decision to point the finger at Moscow was based on its record of “conducting state-sponsored assassinations and our assessment that Russia views some defectors as legitimate targets for assassinations”. She said Britain must “stand ready to take much more extensive measures”. Mrs May’s tough response may be a result of the criticism she received as home secretary for not having taken stronger measures when the Kremlin was implicated in the murder of Alexander Litvinenko, a defector from the Russian security services who was poisoned with polonium in London in 2006. A number of other exiled Russians have died in mysterious circumstances in Britain. A huge investigation is now under way about what happened to Mr Skripal. And the East-West spy war could be entering new territory. Mrs May said that if there was no “credible response” from Russia by the end of March 13th, Britain would conclude there had been the “unlawful use of force”. Britain is already sounding out its allies about a co-ordinated expulsion of Russian intelligence officers based at diplomatic missions in the West, and visa bans on the many senior Russians with a background in the intelligence services. Financial sanctions against the assets of Kremlin cronies are also under discussion. Whatever happens, Britain will need to boost its spy-catching efforts: if the Kremlin is really willing to conduct reckless assassinations in Western countries, it is not only intelligence veterans who will feel nervous about their safety. The stark certainties of the cold-war spy world have given way to a new landscape: murky and in some ways more dangerous.