NO ONE was going to mix up the envelopes at this year’s Academy Awards. Each one had the category embossed in small block capitals in the middle, and in thick gold block capitals in the top and bottom corners, so that the people at the back of the Dolby Theatre could have read them, as well as the presenters on the stage. After Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway announced that the winner for best picture was “The Shape of Water”, the film’s director, Guillermo del Toro, jokingly double-checked that there hadn’t been a mistake, as there was last year when Mr Beatty and Ms Dunaway gave the prize to “La La Land”, only to give it to “Moonlight” a minute later. One might think that Mr del Toro (pictured below) was purely joking. He had to like his chances, since “The Shape of Water” had already won Oscars for director, score and production design. But there was doubt about best picture, one of the few categories in which there was any mystery. Mr del Toro’s gorgeous amphibian-human love story triumphed, but “Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri” and “Get Out” were both in with a chance, the former doing particularly well at the Baftas last month. But many of the categories were close to being foregone conclusions: nobody needed to open the envelopes to know what was inside them. There was almost no question that Gary Oldman would win his first best-actor Oscar for playing, under a tonne of prosthetic make-up, Winston Churchill in “Darkest Hour”. Frances McDormand (pictured above), too, was a shoo-in for best actress for Martin McDonagh’s small-town tale of crime and punishment, “Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri”. Sam Rockwell was a dead cert for best supporting actor in the same film. And Allison Janney had been the best-supporting-actress favourite throughout awards season for her scabrous portrayal of Tonya Harding’s mother in “I, Tonya”, even if her role was smaller and her performance less nuanced than those of her competitors in an extraordinarily strong category. The results of the behind-the-scenes categories were just as predictable. Not even Hollywood would have been cruel enough to give the award for best adapted screenplay to anyone but James Ivory for his “Call Me By Your Name” script: he is 89, after all. Similarly, how could the Academy not have given the cinematography Oscar to Roger Deakins for “Blade Runner 2049”, considering that this was the 14th time he had been nominated, without a previous win? As the ceremony stretched to three and then four hours, this predictability became deadening. Jimmy Kimmel hosted for a second year in succession, with his usual balance of political earnestness and deadpan irreverence, and in general the event proceeded as swiftly and smoothly as a factory production line. But maybe a screw-up or two would have been welcome. As it was, even some scintillating historic moments lost their spark. It was significant that the award for the best foreign-language film was won by “A Fantastic Woman”, a Chilean drama about a trans woman, starring a trans woman. And it was heartening to see Jordan Peele collect the best original screenplay award for his anti-racism horror-satire, “Get Out”, thus enshrining him as the first black winner of that prize. But the themes of diversity and inclusion were established so early in the evening, and remained so prevalent from then on, that it would have been a shock if anyone hadn’t brought them up. Songs, speeches, montages: everything and everyone was on message. In the year of #MeToo and #TimesUp, it was inevitable and correct that the Academy should have devoted segments to the changes which have been wrought in Hollywood since allegations of Harvey Weinstein’s sexual misconduct became public. And sometimes these segments were delightful: Tiffany Haddish and Maya Rudolph stole the show with a skit about their blackness, and Lupita Nyong’o and Kumail Nanjiani made a lovely, persuasive case for films made by immigrants. But the ceremony eventually came to feel less like an outraged call to arms than a long lecture, written in thick black gold capital letters, about what a wonderfully warm and welcoming place Hollywood is. Everyone agreed that the times weren’t just a changin’. They had already changed. It’s understandable that, in the wake of the Weinstein scandal, the ceremony’s organisers wanted to repair some of the damage done to their industry’s reputation. But the Academy isn’t practising everything it preaches. There may have been a utopian range of presenters on the stage, but they handed the main prizes to a male director, male screenwriters, a male composer, a male cinematographer, a male editor, a male costume designer, and so on. Over all, there were six female winners on the night, and 33 male winners, which means that, basically, men won everything they possibly could, and that the female nominees didn’t get to stand up until Ms McDormand insisted that they do so during her rabble-rousing speech. When this imbalance is corrected, perhaps in time for the Oscars’ centenary, then those embossed envelopes might contain some genuinely surprising names.