IT WAS billed as the “Great Return March”, the first step in the return of Palestinians in Gaza to the homes their grandparents lived in before Israel’s establishment in 1948. But there was little marching. Most of the estimated 30,000 Palestinians who showed up on March 30th set up tents about half a kilometre from a border fence erected by Israel. They remained there, on the Gaza side, listening to Palestinian politicians make impassioned speeches. Some protesters played football. Israel warned the Palestinians not to get within 300 metres of the fence and said that it would see any attempt to cut through it as an act of violence. Small groups of Palestinians nevertheless moved closer. When some tried to dart all the way to the fence, the Israeli army dropped tear-gas grenades from small drones and Israeli snipers opened fire. According to the Palestinian health ministry in Gaza, at least 13 people were killed and hundreds hurt. This was meant to be the first in a series of marches over the next six and a half weeks. They are an attempt by Hamas, the Islamist militant movement that controls Gaza, to put the Palestinian issue back on the international agenda. They are also a challenge to the leadership of the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, whose Fatah movement controls the West Bank and is Hamas’s bitter rival. Previous efforts to achieve a reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas have all but collapsed. On March 13th an apparent assassination attempt was made on the convoy of the Palestinian prime minister, Rami Hamdallah, who was making a rare visit to Gaza. The Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority (PA) immediately blamed Hamas. The march, which was studiously ignored by the PA, has highlighted the divide. Israeli officials believe that Hamas wants to maintain a ceasefire agreement with Israel that has existed since the two sides fought a war in 2014, which claimed 2,300 Palestinian and 74 Israeli lives. But Hamas has never been so isolated. It is shunned by Arab countries. Israel and Egypt keep Gaza’s borders closed most of the time. Hamas plans to maintain the encampments near the border and to hold similar rallies every Friday until May 14th, the 70th anniversary of Israel’s establishment, which the Palestinians call the Nakba (catastrophe). Sustaining high levels of participation, without escalating the violence, will be a major test of its leadership. 