WHEN Ireland first voted on abortion, back in 1983, there was no doubt as to who was behind the push for a full constitutional ban. The Pro Life Amendment Campaign, which persuaded 67% of voters to approve the 8th Amendment to Ireland’s constitution, was a coalition of Roman Catholic organisations supported by the pope and his bishops. Rosaries and crosses were proudly borne to its marches and rallies. Now, 35 years later, as Ireland prepares to vote, in May or June, on a proposed repeal of the amendment, overt Catholicism has all but vanished from the scene. Although the religious affiliations of many activists are, of course, known, contemporary pro-life groups like the Iona Institute, the Pro Life Campaign, the Life Institute, and Save the 8th present themselves as non- or multi-denominational, or simply leave such matters vague. With good reason. Since 1983 a long series of scandals has battered the church’s moral authority. These include the sexual abuse of children by clerics; the confinement of marginalised women in industrial-scale “Magdalene Laundries” (institutions for what were termed “fallen women”); and forced adoptions and undocumented mass burials at “mother and baby” homes. In the years since then, conservative Catholics have unsuccessfully opposed the legalisation of contraception, divorce and most recently gay marriage, and came out on the losing side in four referendums that they hoped would further strengthen the ban on abortion, for instance by banning travel abroad for one. Patsy McGarry, a veteran religious-affairs correspondent for the Irish Times, says the church and its followers are still heavily involved in the new abortion campaign, but are deliberately downplaying religious arguments. “They are trying to appeal to a younger generation that are not so impressed by traditional Irish Catholic values,” he said. But new global forces and methods are moving into the space vacated by traditional Catholicism. This week Save the 8th confirmed that it has hired Kanto Systems, a London-based political consultancy with links to the campaign for Britain to leave the EU, the embattled Cambridge Analytica (a British firm at the heart of a Facebook data row) and Donald Trump’s election. In January it was reported that the Pro Life Campaign had hired uCampaign, a conservative American outfit that has produced apps for Mr Trump, the National Rifle Association and Vote Leave in Britain. On the pro-choice side, the Abortion Rights Campaign has been forced to return a $25,000 grant from George Soros’s Open Society Foundations, after a regulator deemed it an illegal foreign political donation. Amnesty International Ireland, also campaigning for repeal, faces the same problem in relation to its own donation. Pro-life campaigners are also believed to have raised funds abroad, mainly in America, but have yet to face any such sanction. The Transparent Referendum Initiative, a group of tech activists, says that the paid Facebook posts which were a feature of the Brexit and Trump campaigns have now begun to show up in the Irish referendum. Storyful, a Dublin-based consultancy that authenticates online content, says there has been a recent upsurge in suspicious new Twitter accounts that talk about abortion in Ireland. All, so far, oppose abortion, said Storyful’s Padraic Ryan. Some of these are linked to overseas accounts pushing far-right, anti-liberal and pro-Trump messages. Others note the appearance of “fake news”—demonstrably untrue claims that the anti-abortionists refuse to repudiate. More such cyber-shenanigans are surely to be expected.