IN HIS workshop on Eel Pie Island near Twickenham, glimmering with light from the Thames outside, Trevor Baylis kept wrenches, pliers, cables, hammers, gear-wheels, lengths of piping, light bulbs, massed coat-hangers, tubs of washers, wing-nuts, screws and nails, books, chisels, old St Julien tobacco tins full of bits and bobs, saws, hacksaws, cross-saws, balls of string, a splendid metal lathe which neighbours would pop in to use, sheets of foil dropped in the war by German bombers, all his dead domestic appliances (for disassembly and cannabilisation), and last but not least his boyhood Meccano sets, their instructions held together with yellowing Sellotape, out of which he would still make little clockwork vehicles that buzzed along the worktops in a determined way. So when one evening in 1991 he was sitting, feet up and pipe in mouth, watching a TV programme about the spread of HIV in Africa, and the need to help educate poor folk who couldn’t afford batteries for radios, chances were that the solution lay in one of his workshop trays. He fell into a reverie in which he was a colonial settler, shorts, fly-swatter and all, on his veranda with a gin and tonic, listening to some number on a wind-up gramophone. If so much noise could come from a rusty nail spring-released to drag round a piece of Bakelite, why not use a crank-wound spring to coax sound from a radio? The workshop provided a transistor radio, the clockwork motor from a toy car and the gears of a music box, and from this gizmo, in half an hour, he produced a first, unbearably exciting, bark of sound. Basic decencyAfter three months he ended up with a sturdy version which he had to promote, first of all, and then protect. That was the problem. He was great at promotion, since he liked to show off, and his previous incarnation as a salesman for Purley Pools had turned before you could say ‘Hey presto!’ into a job as a stunt diver and underwater escapologist for a German circus. But if you talked about an idea, even just on the phone or to a friend, it leaked out into the air and someone would steal it. To protect an idea, with patents and so on, involved spilling it. And once you did, the jackals in pinstriped suits were waiting to do you up like the proverbial kipper, eat you for breakfast and spit you out, bones and all. It had happened before. In 1982, after a close friend had died in a trapeze accident, he had spent a mad few months hardly sleeping or eating, thinking up more than 250 devices to help disabled or paralysed people perform daily tasks. To get into the right psychological state he got a mate to tie one arm to his side for an hour, after which he invented one-handed tin-, jar- and bottle-openers, binoculars, graters, embroidery frames and sketching easels, and foot-operated scissors, all of which the NHS liked and all of which were stolen from him by spivs and crooks who posed as business partners. The prototypes were still in his workshop (together with some electric shoes, useful for charging batteries in wild places, which hadn’t caught on), but he had made not a penny from them. In fact, he had lost £20,000. Money wasn’t the only point, of course. He had already built his ultimate bachelor pad on Eel Pie Island, with an indoor swimming pool and two terraces, decked with artificial flowers, on which sat the Baylis, a car he had made himself, bright red and with five miles on the clock. Happily solitary, since no wife would tolerate the disarray, with many friends and a dog for company, he was doing what he liked best, tinkering and inventing. But he hoped to leave a bit more than a brass plaque on a bench when he went, things that would help people. And he wanted to be known as their originator and creator, the owner of the ideas behind them. That was simple fairness, basic decency. When it came to his clockwork radio, he succeeded on one score. After being laughed at for a few years as a wally off his trolley, an appearance on the BBC in 1994 turned him into a genius. Investors got interested, and production began in South Africa by a partner-company called FreePlay that employed disabled people. He promoted his invention ever after with tours of Africa and India, TV appearances and after-dinner speeches. But the radio, too, had been stolen away from him. The engineers at FreePlay made the spring charge a battery instead of merely generating power, which extended the playing time to about an hour. To him this was just a tweak to his design, an innovation, like painting it a different colour, but it meant that the 13 patents he had taken out no longer applied and other companies swooped in, knocking his royalties sideways. Wound up by now to a pitch of gentle indignation, he set up bodies that offered inventors advice on patents and ownership of ideas, and helped them find reputable business partners. He wanted a lot more done for them, including clapping intellectual-property thieves in jail and teaching inventing in schools, alongside art. But—as with art—creative spark and commercial nous, the individual and the team, made an awkward fit. He objected to being seen as the typical reclusive British eccentric, pottering away in his workshop at inventions that made fortunes for someone else. But, apart from the reclusive bit, that was exactly what he was.