HAVING failed to get Rupert Murdoch’s attention before, Brian Roberts, chief executive of Comcast, certainly has it now. On February 27th the American pay-television giant said it would make a £22.1bn ($30.7bn) offer for Sky, the European satellite broadcaster, potentially disrupting Disney’s agreed $66bn purchase of much of 21st Century Fox. The surprise announcement comes as Fox, which owns 39% of Sky, is trying to get regulatory approval in Britain for its own purchase of the remaining 61% of the satellite broadcaster, which it would then hand over to Disney after shareholders and regulators approve that deal (perhaps by the end of this year). By putting himself in the middle of that complex transaction, with an all-cash offer 16% richer than that of Fox, Mr Roberts is causing people to wonder what his goal is. He had tried to outbid Disney for Fox’s assets in the autumn, but gave up due to a lack of engagement from Mr Murdoch. He may now only be after Sky, or he may intend to make a still bigger hostile bid to top Disney’s. In American media-industry circles the betting is on the latter, as investors there take a dim view of the prospects of Sky, which relies on a declining form of distribution in satellite and whose pay-TV subscribers are increasingly fickle (see chart). “It’s hard to see it as anything other than a prelude for a bigger bid for Fox,” says Craig Moffett of MoffettNathanson, a research firm. Such a bid is not realistic at the moment because American regulators have sued to block a similar vertical merger, AT&T’s purchase of Time Warner. If AT&T were to win that case, Mr Roberts might feel emboldened to make a play for Fox’s other assets, including its film studio and TV networks. For now Mr Roberts is telling investors that his bid makes sense, partly because he views Sky as being more than a satellite broadcaster. Like Comcast, which bought NBCUniversal in 2011, Sky operates TV networks in sports, news and entertainment, produces original shows and holds sports rights in key markets (which are getting cheaper in Europe, in contrast to sports-rights inflation in America). Sky has 23m retail customers in Europe, compared to Comcast’s 29m at home. “Operationally we do very similar things,” Mr Roberts says. That makes for a good fit now, he says, while building scale for the challenges posed by Netflix and Amazon. Sky also has a Netflix-like product, Now TV, that has gained in popularity as customers drop its more expensive satellite packages. Despite disapproval from Comcast investors, who would probably prefer the company to buy back shares (Comcast’s share price has fallen by 8.5% since the announcement), there is a case to be made for buying Sky. In January it posted strong results for the last six months of 2017, with 5% revenue growth and 10% growth in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation, to £1.1bn. Then in February Sky secured the next three years of Premier League football rights for less than it paid last time, a surprise to some that increased the value of the company. What Bob Iger, Disney’s chief, and Mr Murdoch will make of the timing is another question. For Mr Murdoch the Comcast announcement complicates the years-long drama that has been his effort to take full control of Sky. In February Fox promised to regulators that Sky News would get an independent editorial board, a move that was expected to help satisfy concerns that the network not be influenced by the Murdochs, who have a big presence in British media and operate Fox News in America. Mr Roberts notes that Comcast has been a reliable steward of NBC News. Fox has reiterated its commitment to its offer of £11.7bn for the other 61% of Sky, made in December 2016. Disney has said nothing. If Mr Iger wants to safeguard Disney’s acquisition of the Fox assets, he can ask Fox to increase its offer for Sky, a cost that would eventually be borne by Disney. Either way it is clear Sky is worth more now, whether on its merits or as a pawn in a larger game.