SIR ROGER BANNISTER, who died on March 3rd, was the epitome of the amateur sportsman. At Oxford in 1954 he became the first person to run a mile in less than four minutes, having spent the morning on hospital duty as a junior doctor in London. Two decades later it was his career in medicine and public service, rather than his record-breaking run on the Iffley Road track, that earned him his knighthood. In 1971 he became the first chairman of the British Sports Council, in which role he instructed a group of chemists to devise the first test for anabolic steroids. Today’s professional athletes push the boundaries of the physically possible further than Sir Roger did. But have they also been testing the limits of the rules on drugs? On March 5th a parliamentary committee published a report on doping which found “acute failures in several different organisations in athletics and cycling”. The report made uncomfortable reading for some of the biggest names in British sport, and raised questions over whether the country’s pursuit of medals has led some to cheat. Lord Coe, president of the International Association of Athletics Federations and a former runner, is accused of misleading Parliament. He told MPs that he learned of widespread Russian doping in December 2014, though he had in fact received an e-mail about it in August of that year. He claims that he ignored the e-mail’s detailed attachments. Sir Mo Farah, who has won four Olympic long-distance titles, received an unrecorded quantity of L-carnitine, a supplement that is legal only in small amounts, before the London marathon in 2014. The injection was administered by the then-chief doctor at UK Athletics, the national governing body, who failed to write down the dose. The parliamentary report mentions that Sir Mo’s former coach, Alberto Salazar, is under investigation by America’s anti-doping agency for illegally using such supplements to enhance his athletes’ performances. Sir Mo insists that he has never broken the rules. The report’s biggest section concerns British Cycling, the national governing body for the sport, and Team Sky, an affiliated private cycling team, which between them have won 22 Olympic golds and five Tour de France titles in the past decade. It focuses on a mystery substance given to Sir Bradley Wiggins, who with eight medals is Britain’s most decorated Olympian, at a race in 2011. Team Sky claims that this was a legal asthma medication which the doctor forgot to record. The report presents circumstantial evidence that it may in fact have been triamcinolone, a steroid that may be used to treat asthma only with an official “therapeutic-use exemption”, which Sir Bradley did not have at the time. He strongly denies cheating. An anonymous source from Team Sky told the parliamentary committee that the team used such exemptions tactically, “with an ultimate aim of supporting performance”. The MPs conclude that Team Sky’s behaviour in this respect “crossed the ethical line”. Sir David Brailsford, the team’s boss, denies that exemptions were ever used without medical need. It is not the first time that British cyclists have come under scrutiny. An independent review of British Cycling last year uncovered evidence of bullying and a “culture of fear”. Chris Froome, Team Sky’s four-time Tour de France champion, is under investigation for exceeding the legal dose of salbutamol, another asthma medication. He, too, denies cheating. In the four years before the Rio Olympics in 2016, Britain funnelled £274m ($380m) to sports that it had identified as ripe for medal-winning. The strategy was spectacularly successful, with Britain earning more gold medals than any country bar America. But the growing number of allegations that rules were broken or bent has made many wonder if some athletes and coaches went too far in pursuit of a winning edge. The parliamentary committee noted that, in contrast to the sums spent on trying to win medals, only £6m a year is set aside for Britain’s anti-doping agency, which the MPs said was not enough. It all feels a long way from the Iffley Road. Sir Roger’s favoured training was a hike through the Scottish mountains. His efforts to increase participation were based on the belief that sport was “a natural, worthwhile and enjoyable form of human expression”. It would be a shame if those ideals died with him.