IT WAS not perhaps the most propitious way in which to celebrate this week’s first anniversary of Theresa May’s letter invoking the Article 50 process for leaving the European Union. Even as Jacob Rees-Mogg, a prominent Brexiteer, was ridiculing Remainers as being like the Japanese soldier who surrendered only 30 years after the second world war, Parliament was debating a fresh scandal over the financing of the Vote Leave campaign in 2016. The official watchdog, the Electoral Commission, has reopened an investigation that it had earlier closed. The scandal centres on claims that, as Vote Leave neared the £7m ($10m) spending cap imposed on it by the commission, it handed £625,000 to another group, BeLeave. The rules would have permitted this only if BeLeave were wholly independent of Vote Leave. But Shahmir Sanni, a whistleblower who worked as a volunteer with BeLeave, has come forward to say that, far from being independent, the group was told exactly what to do with the money. If such co-ordination were proved, it would be a criminal offence. An extra frisson arises because most of the cash seems to have been spent on a digital-marketing firm linked to Cambridge Analytica, the political-research group that is in the news for misusing Facebook data. The story inevitably has a political angle. Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, and Michael Gove, the environment secretary, were leading members of Vote Leave. Mr Johnson has called the claims against the organisation “utterly ludicrous” and insisted that the referendum was won legally. Stephen Parkinson, Mrs May’s political secretary, also worked for the group. Mr Sanni claims that he cleared most of his actions during the campaign with Mr Parkinson, who has responded by saying that the two were in a relationship at the time—news that has outed Mr Sanni as gay. Mrs May is resisting calls to sack Mr Parkinson. Does any of this matter beyond Westminster? If Vote Leave is found to have breached the rules, that will support the notion that Leavers played fast and loose in 2016. Yet Remainers spent a lot more, and benefited from a government leaflet costing £9m that openly backed their cause. On the evidence so far, it is hard to conclude that the 52:48 result was changed by digital marketing, however cleverly done. A more plausible contention is that Leavers misled voters by claiming there were no economic downsides to Brexit, no risks to Britain’s single-market benefits and fully £350m a week extra for the National Health Service. But Remainers had plenty of opportunities and money to debunk these claims at the time. The broader conclusion is that the argument between the two sides will go on, even as crucial talks begin on Britain’s future trade arrangements. On March 23rd the EU formally approved its guidelines for the talks, along with the terms for a 21-month transition period after March 2019. At an event on March 26th with the Institute for Government, a think-tank, Carolyn Fairbairn, head of the Confederation of British Industry, welcomed the transitional deal for giving greater certainty to business. She was also pleased that the threat of a cliff-edge Brexit with no deal at all had sharply diminished. But she noted that the gap between the two sides on a future trade agreement was very wide. Based on past experience, the odds are that Britain will end up having to accept the terms of the EU’s guidelines. Because of Mrs May’s red lines of leaving the single market, the customs union and the European Court of Justice, these point clearly to a free-trade deal that is little broader than the one the EU has with Canada. And that will leave unsolved the problem of avoiding a hard border in Northern Ireland. Coming on top of the row over campaign spending, this will surely fuel demands for a meaningful parliamentary vote on the Brexit deal this autumn, which implies more than the simple take-it-or-leave-it option being suggested by the government. It may even increase calls for a referendum on the final deal. Voters bored by the whole subject may blench at the prospect. But one unwelcome side-effect of the Brexit process is to suck attention away from all other political issues. Even a Japanese soldier marooned on a South Pacific island might find this dispiriting.