THE release of a new Keith Jarrett album is not usually a significant event in the world of jazz. Over a career that has spanned some 50 years, Mr Jarrett has released dozens of albums, either as a sideman (with Miles Davis or Jan Garbarek), his trio (with Gary Peacock on bass and Jack DeJohnette on drums) or as a solo artist. Even the most devoted fans of Mr Jarrett have only a fraction of his works. Yet the release this month of “After the Fall”, an album with Messrs Peacock and DeJohnette, is different. It marks the first album since that trio, which played together for over 25 years, split up in 2014. News that Mr Jarrett has cancelled a forthcoming solo concert at Carnegie Hall in New York, reportedly on account of a long-term illness, has added to the poignancy. The album is a recording of a concert from 1998. That places it around halfway along the chronology of the trio—they began playing together in 1983—and they sound quite different in their early period to their late. In the mid-1980s and early 1990s the players turned jazz standards inside out. Mr Peacock’s bass sounds strong, almost flangey. Mr Jarrett’s left hand is hyperactive (most notably on “Standards Live”). Two of the earliest albums are recorded in studios. They would occasionally play in jazz clubs, where on some recordings you can hear the sound of smashing glass as a punter knocks over a wine bottle. By the end, however, the trio’s output was more restrained, intellectual—and at times a little more boring. Mr Peacock’s bass sounds weaker (see “Tokyo ’96”) and Mr Jarrett could go for long periods without playing anything with his left hand. By then, too, they were almost exclusively playing in concert halls. Though that was a perfectly rational decision from an economic perspective, it severely compromised the quality of the sound. Good jazz music requires the architectural compactness of a jazz club, not the airiness of a huge auditorium designed for symphony orchestras. (Inexplicably, it was after moving into concert halls that Mr Jarrett became intolerant of any sort of noise from the audience, occasionally stomping out of concerts.) Where does this recording fit in? Recorded in a concert hall, it mainly focuses on straight-ahead jazz, with classics such as “Autumn Leaves” and “Bouncin’ with Bud”. It was recorded as Mr Jarrett was recovering from a long illness. In the liner notes Mr Jarrett says that he chose to play this sort of music as “I didn’t think I needed to play as hard as I often did (as my energy still seemed too low to ‘dig in’ too much)”. Perhaps he is being a little hard on himself. The opening few minutes of “Autumn Leaves”, one of the trio’s favourite pieces over the years, sounds fresh. But occasionally it does sound as though the players are going through the motions. The quality of the recording does not exactly help. Mr Jarrett had not arranged for the concert to be professionally recorded. A more amateurish version was made, however, which Mr Jarrett deems “not really bad at all”. The recording is nowhere near as faulty as “Up For It”, where the musicians sound as though they are wrapped in cotton wool, but for a recording that costs some £20 ($28) that is not really good enough. Devoted fans of Mr Jarrett may want this album, but there are plenty of better ones to choose from.