STEVEN MNUCHIN, the Treasury secretary, enjoys several spectacular powers. One is the right to sign dollar bills. Another is the power to impose sanctions that exclude foreign actors and entities from the American financial system—which given the dollar’s role as a reserve currency is tantamount to banishment from the world of international finance and business. Senior officials who have watched Mr Mnuchin at work say that he takes his sanctions powers seriously, and is an enthusiast for using the Treasury as an arm of American hard power. On March 15th Mr Mnuchin’s team at the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) used their super powers to sanction Russian spies and Kremlin associates for two broad attacks on America. One set of sanctions targets 13 Russians charged in an indictment in February by the special counsel, Robert Mueller, for meddling in the 2016 election by such acts as setting up fake online persona to bombard millions of Americans with divisive political messages and to organise political rallies on American soil. A second set of sanctions targets two Russian intelligence agencies, the Federal Security Service (FSB) and the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) as well as six senior spooks for conducting “destructive cyber-attacks” including the NotPetya attack, an assault attributed to the Russian military on February 15th in statements released by the White House and British government, and which the Treasury described as “the most destructive and costly cyber-attack in history.” In a statement ringing with resolve and indignation, Mr Mnuchin said: “the administration is confronting and countering malign Russian cyber activity, including their alleged interference in US elections, destructive cyber-attacks and intrusions targeting critical infrastructure.” Readers may be forgiven for feeling, once more, that they have entered a hall of mirrors. For the Mueller indictment laid out in forensic, devastating detail how Russian meddling in the 2016 election was initially aimed at fomenting general division and chaos in American politics. Then, once the Republican and Democratic presidential primaries were underway, the Russian trolls and internet hacking bosses explicitly sought to help the candidacies of Donald Trump and Senator Bernie Sanders, and do down more conventional politicians. But once the primaries were over the indictment lays out with absolute clarity that all efforts were directed at hurting Hillary Clinton, and helping Mr Trump. Mr Mueller’s indictment quotes e-mails and cites banking transactions showing Russians hiring unwitting Americans to dress as Mrs Clinton in a prison costume and ride around in a cage. It quotes online advertisements paid for by Russians that called Mrs Clinton a devil, enthused over Mr Trump and—in perhaps the most cynical move of all—tried to suppress enthusiasm for the Democrats among non-white voters, urging them to throw their votes away on protest candidates. All that is in the Mueller indictment that Mr Mnuchin, Mr Trump’s Treasury secretary and a vocal Trump loyalist, has used as a template for his sanctions. Yet here is where the mirrors loom and dazzle the unwary eye. For in the very same week that the Treasury is sanctioning Russia for these acts, another set of vocal Trump defenders, this time Republican members of the House of Representatives, issued a draft report on Russian election meddling which stoutly denied that the government of President Vladimir Putin intended to help Mr Trump. In an overview of what remains a classified report, the Republican majority in the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence stated that after a year of investigations, they found that Russia did attack American political institutions in 2015-16 “to sow discord”. The overview added that the majority concurs with the Intelligence Community’s assessment of the attacks, “except with respect to Putin’s supposed preference for candidate Trump.” Democrats on the committee call that conclusion a partisan whitewash and accuse their colleagues of refusing to pursue leads and interview vital witnesses for fear of learning things embarrassing to Mr Trump. That committee statement also divided Republicans, it should be noted. On March 13th Representative Trey Gowdy of South Carolina, a senior member of the House Intelligence Committee, broke with his own colleagues and issued a statement saying that it was: "clear, based on the evidence, Russia had disdain for Secretary Clinton and was motivated in whole or in part by a desire to harm her candidacy or undermine her Presidency had she prevailed." Sources close to Mr Gowdy—a stern conservative who in his day has pursued ferocious attacks on Mrs Clinton’s record as secretary of state—told Politico that in a two-candidate race Russia was effectively helping Mr Trump by default. When assessing his courage it may relevant that Mr Gowdy is not seeking re-election to his seat. Yet Mr Trump embraced the House Republicans’ verdict with enthusiasm, tweeting in all-capital letters that the committee had found no evidence of collusion or co-ordination between Russia and his campaign. As recently as November 2017 Mr Trump, while visiting Asia, noted to reporters that Mr Putin had assured him that Russia did not meddle in the election, saying: “Every time I see him, he says “I didn’t do that”, and I really believe that when he tells me that, he means that.” Yet here is the Treasury following Mr Mueller’s indictment to levy financial sanctions. One more hall of mirrors yawns, this time linked to the attempted murder of a former Russian spy and his daughter with deadly nerve agents in the southern English city of Salisbury. After some equivocation from the president’s spokesmen, on March 15th the White House issued a firm statement denouncing Russia for its actions in Britain, citing the British government’s finding that there is no plausible alternative explanation to the charge that Russia was behind the attacks and calling it a “clear violation” of international law. How to make sense of these double messages? Focus on two words: what and why. Russia’s increasingly outrageous actions are so blatant that even Mr Trump is unable to dismiss them, and the wheels of the rule of law turn to name and punish Russian bad actors. So the Trump administration and Republicans cannot duck what Mr Putin is up to. But it is too painful for Trump allies to contemplate a related question: why Russia wanted to meddle in the election to help the man whose nationalist message so thrills their voters.