IN THE quarter of a century to 2007, Australia had three prime ministers. Since then not a single one has survived a full three-year term. First went Kevin Rudd, a Labor leader who was replaced by his deputy, Julia Gillard, in 2010. When her popularity plummeted, he knifed her in return but lost a general election shortly after. That led to the installation of Tony Abbott, a hardline conservative, as prime minister in 2013. But he lasted only until 2015 before being toppled by the more moderate Malcolm Turnbull. Last month, following a coup fomented by Mr Abbott’s hard-right bloc, Mr Turnbull lost his job. Scott Morrison, the former treasurer, is now prime minister. That brings the total to six in 11 prosperous years. Why does Australia keep losing leaders? Its politicians can replace their bosses in a vote by party MPs known as a leadership “spill”. These can happen quickly and brutally, with the winner requiring just 50% of the vote. Spills were rare before this century, so some ascribe their increasing popularity to a modern preoccupation with opinion polls and popularity. Parties often bet that replacing a prime minister will boost support before the next election. A series of weak leaders, nursing personal vendettas, has only added to the problem. (Labor’s spills were built on the battle between Mr Rudd and Ms Gillard. Among the conservatives, Mr Turnbull and Mr Abbott started attacking each other as early as 2009). “We’ve set a precedent,” observes Michael Fullilove of the Lowy Institute, a think-tank. “We are waiting for a prime minister who can break it.” Other causes relate to the peculiarities of Australia’s parliamentary system. First, its three-year electoral cycle is among the shortest anywhere in the world. Prime ministers are barely sworn in before parties start thinking about the next election. Second, the Australian senate is one of the world’s most powerful. It can neuter governments that do not control it, and not many governments do. The upper house is elected by proportional representation and is now dominated by a menagerie of minor parties and independents. Third, it is compulsory to vote in Australia. Ian McCallister, a professor at the Australian National University, estimates that up to 18% of voters take part only because they have to. This cohort is drawn to style over substance, he says, and has underscored a deep culture of personality politics in Australia. The churn might be easier to understand if Australians were hard done-by. But the economy has not been in recession for 27 years. The coups are increasingly counterproductive. Australians have grown sick of the insecurity they precipitate, and profess historically low trust in their politicians. Support for the Liberals has crashed to its lowest level in a decade after the latest upheaval. But change is possible. After its back and forth, Labor installed rules in 2013 that made it harder to knife the leader. They must now be elected by both MPs and members over a month-long process that is intended to prompt deliberation. Politicians who want to force a spill must deliver a petition signed by 60% of their colleagues. (Liberal rebels, by comparison, still need only half.) Mr Rudd argued recently that the change has made it impossible to “launch a coup at the drop of a hat”. His successor, Bill Shorten, is unpopular with voters, but has survived unchallenged for almost six years. The Liberals might learn something from that.