 THE last time Recep Tayyip Erdogan paid an official visit to Germany, in February 2014, the Turkish lira was worth three to the euro, GDP was growing at 8.5%, progress in accession talks with the EU was thought possible and Mr Erdogan himself was prime minister. Today, after forcing through a constitution that removes most checks on his powers, Mr Erdogan is president, the EU accession process is dead, the lira buys less than a seventh of a euro and the economy is on the brink of a painful downturn. Relations with Germany are haunted by the aftermath of an abortive coup against Mr Erdogan in 2016, which saw 60,000 people, including at least 30 Germans, thrown behind bars. Turkey needs new funds, however, and old friends. Germany would also like to normalise ties. The fact that it has rolled out the red carpet for Turkey’s strongman leader, who arrives on September 27th, is a clear sign that Germany wants an improvement. Is a diplomatic reset on the horizon? As Turkey’s biggest trading partner, and as home to 3m people of Turkish origin, Germany does not want to see the country’s economy go down in flames. Neither do the 7,000 or so German companies operating in Turkey. Chancellor Angela Merkel's government also has reason to fear that an unstable Turkey may no longer abide by an agreement with the EU that keeps millions of refugees on its side of the Mediterranean. Germany has backed Turkey’s efforts to stave off a humanitarian catastrophe in Idlib province, in Syria’s north-west, where opposition fighters and civilians face a possible bloodbath at the hands of the regime in Damascus. Mr Erdogan recently persuaded Syria’s main ally, Vladimir Putin, to agree to establish a demilitarised zone between government and rebel forces. The deal gives Turkey more time to persuade the jihadist leaders who control much of the province to put down their arms, and to isolate or kill off those radicals determined to fight to the end. Compared with last year, when Mr Erdogan accused officials in Berlin of behaving like Nazis after his ministers were prevented from campaigning with German Turks, the atmosphere is considerably less toxic. Turkey has already released most of the Germans arrested since the coup, including two journalists. Mr Erdogan, meanwhile, has turned his ire on the Trump administration, which imposed tariffs on Turkish steel and aluminium products in response to the recent arrest of an American pastor in Turkey. Turkish officials cheered when Mrs Merkel's government came out against the American sanctions. A couple of German companies are reportedly interested in grabbing a share of a multibillion-dollar project to overhaul Turkey’s depleted rail network. Mr Erdogan will arrive in Germany with a long wish-list. He would like to see Germany lift its veto on an expanded customs union between the EU and Turkey, to reassure investors, and to revive talks on visa-free travel to Europe for Turks. More than anything else, he hopes to persuade Mrs Merkel to offer Turkey’s struggling economy a financial lifeline that conveniently bypasses the IMF. He is almost certain to walk away emptyhanded, though. For German companies, hundreds of which briefly found themselves under suspicion in Turkey for terrorist links in the summer of last year, the country’s woeful rule-of-law record continues to be a major deterrent. For Germany’s ruling coalition, the abuses committed by Mr Erdogan’s government in the wake of the 2016 coup, plus his own “Nazi” comments, continue to make any progress in talks with the EU (or a bail-out) unpalatable. Mr Erdogan is finding that burning bridges is easier than building them.