“MANIAC” was so promising. The ten-episode series, which was released on September 21st, is crammed with talent. It is directed by Cary Fukunaga, who won an Emmy in 2014 for his work on the first season of “True Detective”, and who has recently been confirmed as the director of the next James Bond film. It is written by Patrick Somerville, a novelist who wrote and produced “The Leftovers”, an acclaimed television drama. Emma Stone (“La La Land”, “Battle of the Sexes”) and Jonah Hill (“Wolf of Wall Street”, “War Dogs”), actors both recognised by the Academy in recent years, star. The supporting cast is equally impressive, including Justin Theroux (“American Psycho”, “The Girl on the Train”), Sonoya Mizuno (“Crazy Rich Asians”) and Sally Fields. Its confidence bolstered by such a strong creative team, “Maniac” sets out to explore ambitious terrain: the human mind. In an alternative, hyper-capitalist present, Annie (Ms Stone) and Owen (Mr Hill)—two different kinds of disaffected loner—turn to a suspect drug company called Nerberdine Pharmaceutical Biotech, which promises that three pills will allow them to identify and overcome the causes of their unhappiness. The pills do this by forcing their takers into a series of dream scenarios, monitored by an overly intelligent computer and some worryingly dim scientists; the idea is that individuals are able to better understand themselves as their strange surroundings force them out of old patterns of behaviour. This premise in place, the story unfolds almost entirely in the adjacent, imagined worlds in which Annie and Owen keep mysteriously bumping into one another. It allows the show to flick rapidly between a wide range of genres: from a Coen Brothers-esque suburban romp; to a glamorous seance in the woods, full of mediums and mink fur coats; to an elfin quest plucked straight from “The Lord of the Rings”. The problem is that the show is much more concerned with the conceits explored in these dream sequences than creating anything that the viewer might actually connect with. The characters’ origin stories and their motivations feel two dimensional. Their subconscious adventures allow them to make certain realisations—that letting people in is healthier than isolation, for example—but these feel glib given the time and energy that “Maniac” dedicates to reaching them. For a show that revolves around the bold claim that humanity can “evolve past suffering”, the actual evolution experienced by the characters is negligible. Another problem is the series’ heavy-handed approach. Characters occasionally declaim things like “do you know what is real?” or “as far as I can tell, there is no plan or pattern to the universe. It’s just chaos”—lines laughable in their earnestness. Owen’s status as an outsider is hammered home by his exclusion from a portrait of his sinisterly preppy, loafer-wearing family. Annie’s agoraphobic father hides from the world in a specially designed pod called “A-Void”. The supercomputer—presented as a cross between a tamagotchi and a depressive version of HAL from “A Space Odyssey”—assumes the personality of its creator’s famous life-coach mother. In a nod to the problems caused by inner fantasies, a recurring motif is the novel “Don Quixote”. It is not enough for the show to be fun, or weird, or visually arresting: everything is a metaphor, which means that nothing is. Still, there are a few high points. Some of the more satirical inventions in “Maniac” are amusing, such as “Ad-Buddy”, a direct form of advertising where a person follows you around extolling the virtues of various products, or “Friend-Proxy”, a gig-economy type service which gets strangers to roleplay at being your friend. Ms Stone sprints through scenes with admirable energy and skill. (Mr Hill, unfortunately, is essentially a mannequin, filling each new costume with the same abject meekness). The imagined worlds are beautifully rendered, as is the Japanese retro-futurist aesthetic of the “real” world New York. The problem is not the carapace, but the content. In recent years television has been regarded as a hotbed of creativity and risk-taking that is lacking in Hollywood. Netflix, in particular, has contributed to this reputation, and has been able to carefully monitor what viewers respond to best. Darkly comic mind-bending shows like “Black Mirror” proved to be wildly popular, as have famous casts, big budgets and novelty. “Maniac” feels mathematically designed to hit these metrics and, in fact, it was. In an interview, Mr Fukunaga said that Netflix “know exactly how their viewers watch things” and so the show was “a decision that was made 100% based on audience participation...I have no doubt the algorithm will be right.” His confidence was misplaced; “Maniac” misunderstands the ingredients of good storytelling. Edward Albee once said that if a play wouldn’t make sense when staged with just two chairs and a hanging light bulb, there was something fundamentally wrong with it. Take away the spinning carnival lights in “Maniac” and there is nothing to see.