FOR three days this month Indians and people of Indian descent packed a grand hotel in west Chicago. While drinking prodigious quantities of milky chai they debated how to promote Hindus’ interests globally. The event, called the World Hindu Congress, was controversial. Tulsi Gabbard from Hawaii, the first Hindu American elected to the House of Representatives, pulled out of chairing what she called an explicitly “partisan political event”. Others boycotted it too. Protesters at one session warned of “fascism” in India, saying Hindu nationalists in office are hostile to Muslims and other religious minorities. They were manhandled out of the hall. Critics were most upset by Mohan Bhagwat, the main speaker. He is the boss of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, India’s dominant Hindu-nationalist group. It is intertwined with the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of Narendra Modi, the prime minister. The event was a reminder that India’s diaspora is involved with politics back home. How does that happen? For years Indian politicians paid little heed to the diaspora. But in the 2014 general election the diaspora, some 30m people strong, proved to be influential. Mr Modi made best use of them, realising the diaspora, especially in America, is wealthy and increasingly interested in politics generally (ever more people of Indian descent are contesting American elections). One estimate suggests over 8,000 Americans and Britons flew to India to campaign for the BJP that year. Probably more important were unknown numbers of volunteers who sent text messages, used social media or made calls to turn out BJP voters in 155 mostly urban constituencies. These were dubbed “digital seats” because voters there could be contacted easily. Unknown sums were also raised among donors abroad. Campaign laws in India do not forbid such activities effectively. In the years since, Mr Modi has held mega-rallies abroad, cramming people into Madison Square Garden in New York and Wembley Stadium in London. The main opposition party, Congress, has belatedly tried catching up. Rahul Gandhi, its leader, visited America in 2017 and urged Indian Americans to help to transform India. In Bahrain this year he called the diaspora important. This is likely to grow into bigger activities in 2019 as Mr Modi seeks re-election. Many more millions of Indians will be reachable next year than were last time, because of the dramatic spread of smartphones and the internet. Arvind Panagariya, a prominent economist, says a single phone company, Jio, offering cheap online access via phones, has added over 200m new subscribers in the past few years. Mr Modi also made it a priority to spread digital access to more villages and small towns. Meanwhile the BJP and its allies have built bigger databases of names, addresses and other contact details from those many tens of thousands of people who attended rallies for Mr Modi. They will be approached to donate or volunteer. Milan Vaishnav, a shrewd observer at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, says it is “striking how the only US affiliate of an Indian political party that appears energised, mobilised, and organised is the BJP’s.” At the World Hindu Congress many speakers were bluntly partisan. Mr Panagariya told his audience it is “very important” that Mr Modi is re-elected. For its part, the diaspora is keen to shape policy back home. Indians abroad have special interests such as in urging India’s government to lobby for preferential treatment for visas to America or Britain, or in encouraging easier remittances (these reached some $69bn to India in 2017, says the World Bank) and investment policies in India. As traders or investors they also lobby for India to be more open to free trade with other countries. Mr Modi has been smart in passing laws to help non-resident Indians, encouraging easier travel and tourism and setting up special offices in Delhi, the capital, to cater for them. As India’s economy grows its diaspora sees ever more benefit from keeping close ties with the old country. Expect an upsurge in diaspora activity in 2019—and in every election for years to come.