If your idea of fun is watching Steve Bannon walk around in slow motion for an hour and a half then you’ll find a lot to love in Errol Morris’s new documentary “American Dharma”. Anyone hoping for something more incisive will be sorely disappointed. It isn’t that Mr Bannon is cleverer than Mr Morris’s previous subjects, such as Robert McNamara in “The Fog of War” and Donald Rumsfeld in “The Unknown Known”. He is not. But whereas those men were defending a legacy that they themselves had some doubts about, Mr Bannon is on a victory lap. And his zero-sum theory of political discourse leaves Mr Morris well and truly gamed. The interview takes place in a Nissen hut, replicating a scene from “Twelve O’Clock High,” a film made in 1949 about the American Air Force’s wartime exploits against Nazi Germany. Mr Bannon’s identification with Gregory Peck’s General Savage is visualised and enacted as, dressed in an Army surplus jacket, he takes another slow-mo stroll around an abandoned airfield. But the flattery is at least mutual. Mr Bannon tells Mr Morris about a screening of “The Fog of War” at the Telluride Film Festival that inspired him to make movies. Having already been the executive producer on several (including a Sean Penn film), Mr Bannon went on to make a series of right-leaning documentaries, earning him the moniker as the Leni Riefenstahl of the Tea Party from none other than Andrew Breitbart, with whom he later co-founded a far-right media outlet, Breitbart News. The American presidential election in 2016 looms large in the narrative. Mr Bannon enjoys a good gloat, not simply over the Democrats but also over the Republican Party establishment, with whom he has fought a guerilla war for years. Mr Bannon asserts that he foresaw Donald Trump’s rise. He states not only his confidence in a win but that “we would win big.” The fact that they didn’t “win big” but actually lost the popular vote doesn’t enter into the discussion because Mr Bannon is in flight now. A frisky tap dance on Hillary Clinton’s political corpse—“she fell into my trap!”—and all Mr Morris has to offer in reply is a shamefaced admission that he voted for Hillary in the primaries. Mr Bannon is genuinely shocked. “I’m crushed,” he says. “You made ‘Fog of War’ … and voted for her?!” The film exposes political dark arts—such as defusing the tape in which Mr Trump boasts that he likes to “grab ‘em by the pussy” by reviving accusations against Bill Clinton, and trumpeting the hacked e-mails from Ms Clinton’s campaign chairman, John Podesta. But they are not seriously questioned. Mr Bannon paints himself as the self-appointed “enabler” who, on finding Mr Trump’s campaign office empty on a Sunday, comes in and shakes things up. He’s on the winning side of every argument. Nobody else is interviewed and Mr Bannon’s version of events goes largely unchallenged by Mr Morris. History may be written by the winners but surely others can scribble something in the margins. As for his own ugly divorces, claims of anti-Semitism and the “Fire and Fury” revelations which led to him being pushed out from Breitbart, Mr Morris seems to have gone high, even as his subject’s life went low. When it comes to the ideology underpinning Mr Bannon’s vision, as Sarah Sanders might say: “There’s no ‘there’ there”. Mr Bannon vaunts his “deplorables” and the “working man,” and those in the trenches in Stanley Kubrick’s “Paths of Glory”, who he believes should be given a chance to rule. The fact that this idea—democracy—is hardly new doesn’t crop up. However, Mr Morris does at least counter that Mr Bannon’s calls for shrinking social policies would harm working-class people and is therefore a contradiction to Mr Bannon’s populism. For a moment, Mr Bannon is silenced. He blinks. But then we’re back to watching him watching “The Bridge on the River Kwai” and Colonel Nicholson’s leadership style; or “The Searchers” and how John Wayne is another kind of outsider. It is yet another instance of Mr Morris elevating his subject to an epic level. That would be laughable if it didn’t seem too soft on someone close to far-right parties in Europe, including the National Front in France and the Northern League in Italy. Mr Morris lobs criticisms at Mr Bannon (calling him “crazy” at one point) but there is no sustained argument. He’s playing badminton while Mr Bannon is playing hard ball. Headlines run across the screen about hate crimes spiking, and we see Tiki torches, hear chants of “Jews will not replace us” and witness straight-out murder in Charlottesville. Mr Morris brings up the accusation of race-baiting and Mr Bannon counters that the neo-Nazis were created by the mainstream media, who give them too much oxygen. The gaslighting works. Mr Morris is so astonished he moves on to the next point. But then Mr Bannon is off again, walking through a crumbling town with curtains blowing through glassless windows. American flags burn while Mr Bannon talks up the threat of imminent revolution if his ideas are not implemented. Fire is dramatic and certainly Mr Morris wants to suggest that this is incendiary stuff. But when the Nissen hut is finally set alight—in slow motion, of course—viewers will be all conflagrated out.