ORSON WELLES’S new film premiered last week at Venice, which is not bad going for a director who died 33 years ago. Welles started on “The Other Side of the Wind” in 1970, when he was 55, but his golden-boy glory days were far behind him. Unable to raise the money he needed to finish his experimental, semi-autobiographical drama, he abandoned it in 1976, and it seemed destined to remain just another entry on the voluminous, tantalising list of his unrealised works. But last year, various legal obstacles were cleared away and Netflix chipped in the money which no one would give Welles. Over 100 hours of footage were restored and pieced together into a two-hour film. For guidance, the editors used the director’s own notes, as well as the sequences he had already assembled while Peter Bogdanovich, Welles’s friend, served as executive producer. The long, long-awaited result, announces an opening caption, is “an attempt to honour and complete [Welles’s] vision”. Editing “The Other Side of the Wind” must have been a phenomenally difficult task. It is not much easier to watch it. As soon as the film begins, it bombards the viewer with a barrage of black-and-white clips, a stroboscope of different faces and perspectives and snatches of conversation. It is as concerned with beat poetry and avant-garde art as it is with conventional narrative cinema. It is exhaustingly fragmentary and clatteringly noisy, but seems to be ahead of its time—and maybe our time, too. “The Other Side of the Wind” certainly anticipates the “found-footage” faux-documentary conceit which was all the rage in horror movies a few years ago. Its central character is a legendary, leonine Hollywood director, Jake Hannaford (played by John Huston), who is having a chaotic party in his mansion to celebrate his 70th birthday. Many of the guests have been asked to chronicle proceedings with their own handheld cameras, so the film we are watching is supposed to be a montage of everything shot by these guests. Friends, associates and hangers-on zip in and out of view, including a wisecracking, fresh-faced acolyte played by Mr Bogdanovich. Bitter critics carp; new-wave directors pay homage. Hannaford himself dodges enquiries about his declining career and whether the party is a way of “getting in touch with the younger generation”. To complicate matters further, Hannaford screens the rushes of his latest work. Shot in colour, the film-within-a-film is a psychedelic hippy thriller which is either a pointed (but not especially funny) parody of Michelangelo Antonioni, an Italian film director, or a flimsy excuse to use lots of shots of Welles’s girlfriend and co-writer, Oja Kodar, running around naked. Indeed, some of the macho attitudes evident in “The Other Side of the Wind” would have been more palatable in the 1970s than they are today. The film’s hard-drinking, cigar-chomping hero—the so-called “Ernest Hemingway of cinema”—is addressed as “Skipper” and compared to the very Prospero who lends his name to this column. He could be seen as a substitute for Huston or Welles himself, or a caricature of a dinosaur who has an inkling of how close he is to extinction. But it isn’t easy to stomach his habit of putting down everyone he sees with a grandiose aphorism, and of addressing a supposedly Native American actress as Pocahontas and Minnehaha. Considering how much the film indulges Hannaford, and how disorientating and frenetic it is in style, it would be interesting to learn how many of Netflix’s subscribers get all the way through it when the streaming service releases “The Other Side of the Wind” in November. Still, it is worth persevering. The film dazzles with its gusto and its formal daring, and intrigues with its postmodernism. Its subject is an ageing director struggling to finish a film and compete with Hollywood’s next generation—and that’s what Welles was too. The jittery editing recalls his “F for Fake”, which came out in 1973, and the structure could be compared to that of his debut masterpiece, “Citizen Kane” (1941), which used numerous subjective viewpoints and a faux-documentary format to fashion a kaleidoscopic portrait of an influential male egotist. But as quintessentially Wellesian as it is, “The Other Side of the Wind” still leaves the viewer pondering questions of authorship. Can it really be said to be an Orson Welles film? If he had completed the project, would it have had that furious pace and that jazzy score? Would it have been more coherent or less? If you admire the talent and the work that have gone into it, whose talent and work are you actually thinking about? Welles would no doubt chuckle at these questions, cigar in hand.