THE outcome of the race for Arizona’s open Senate seat, which could determine control of Congress’s upper chamber, may come down to which portrayal of Kyrsten Sinema the voters find more convincing. The Democratic nominee, who touts herself as independent more often than she mentions her party affiliation, hopes that voters see her as a centrist aisle-crosser; Arizona hasn’t voted to send a Democrat to the Senate since 1988. Martha McSally, the Republican nominee, hopes voters remember Ms Sinema as she was when she first emerged onto Arizona’s political scene: a vociferous leftie who protested American military action in Afghanistan after 9/11. Since then, Ms Sinema has assiduously cultivated a moderate image and record. After failing in runs for Phoenix city council and Arizona’s legislature under the aegis of the Green Party when she was in her twenties, Ms Sinema became a Democrat and won election to the state House of Representatives in 2004. After being elected to her first of three terms in Congress in 2012, Ms Sinema tacked hard toward the centre. She is a now steadfast supporter of the military. She has repeatedly infuriated the Democratic base, voting to restrict entry into America by Iraqi and Syrian refugees, to increase penalties for migrants who re-enter the country illegally, and to reject President Barack Obama’s deal with Iran over its nuclear programme. She votes with President Donald Trump more than almost any of her Democratic colleagues. Her campaign ads are heavy on health-care policy, with Ms Sinema pledging to make coverage more affordable, and warning that her opponent will nix protections for people with pre-existing conditions and saddle older Americans with more expensive premiums. Ms McSally, who became the first female combat pilot in the Air Force before her southern Arizona-based district sent her to Congress in 2014, cuts a stark contrast with Ms Sinema. One of Ms McSally’s campaign ads inform viewers what the two candidates were doing in the days after 9/11. She was in her A-10 Warthog, preparing to fly missions against the Taliban in Afghanistan. Ms Sinema, dressed in a pink tutu, was speaking at anti-war protests. Another ad warns voters not to be fooled by Ms Sinema’s political makeover. Millions of Republican dollars, both from Ms McSally’s campaign and outside groups, are being spent to remind Arizona’s voters of Ms Sinema’s radical past. So far, Ms Sinema appears to have largely withstood the barrage of attack ads. Numerous polls show a close race, and several have Ms Sinema sporting a narrow lead. With Democratic incumbents playing defence in Florida, Indiana, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota and West Virginia, Arizona offers one of the party’s few opportunities to take a Republican-held Senate seat this year. Outside groups from both sides are spending heavily. Ms Sinema’s campaign responds to questions about her move to the centre by pointing out that Ms McSally has herself made a few big shifts. Widely viewed during her first two terms as a moderate Republican, Ms McSally has since shed some of the views that Republican primary voters might find problematic. They include her support for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) programme for immigrants who were brought to America illegally as children. And though she was critical of Mr Trump during his campaign for the presidency and still refuses to say if she voted for him in 2016, Ms McSally seems to have since embraced the president. During the Republican primary, in which she easily dispatched right-wing provocateur Kelli Ward and Joe Arpaio, a former sheriff, Ms McSally ran ads in which the president praised her by name: “My friend, Martha McSally. She’s the real deal”. Some Republicans quietly wonder whether Ms McSally should have kept more distance from him.