IT IS a rare thing for Britons to be united by something that is not the weather or the national football team’s performance at the World Cup, yet somehow the BBC’s latest drama has managed it. You cannot make your morning coffee in the office, nor meet friends in the pub, nor turn on the radio without hearing an in-depth analysis of the latest episode of “Bodyguard”. Conspiracy theories about the plot have been feverishly discussed on social media; a Google search about one controversial aspect brings up 110,000 results. It is already one of the great successes of modern British television. It has a 100% “fresh” rating on Rotten Tomatoes, a review-aggregator site. It had the highest launch figure of any new British drama since 2006, with 10.4m viewers and 40.9% of the market share. (By contrast, “Downton Abbey”, a period-drama smash hit on ITV, boasted an average of 9.2m viewers for its first season in 2009. “The Night Manager”, a starry adaptation of a John le Carré novel, released in 2016, claimed 6.6m.) Netflix has acquired global distribution rights. The show’s popularity has encouraged Counter Terrorism Policing UK to use it as a recruiting tool. The tale of intrigue and derring-do centres upon Sergeant David Budd (Richard Madden), a volatile war veteran. In the first episode he foils a suicide-bomb attack on a train, saving his own children among other passengers, and is assigned as a protection officer to the home secretary, Julia Montague (Keeley Hawes). Threats and attacks are frequent in this somewhat dystopian version of Britain and Montague, as the spokesperson for national security, is an obvious target. She is also wildly unpopular, having consistently pushed for military action and tighter surveillance; Budd himself loathes her politics. He has an unenviable task in keeping her safe (though inevitably the close quarters bring benefits of a certain kind). The premise—man is charged with protecting woman—is clearly not a new one; indeed, you could be forgiven for thinking it was a remake of “The Bodyguard”, a film from 1992 starring Whitney Houston and Kevin Costner. Rogue agents and hard-headed female politicians are not particularly novel or intriguing characters, either, though Mr Madden and Ms Hawes offer convincing performances. Hardly any of the attacks are plausible. Yet though “Bodyguard” is far-fetched and formulaic, it is also well-executed. It thrills and builds tension, with staccato music evincing threat before tragedy strikes. As in Agatha Christie’s novels, every character seems to have a nefarious motive or something to hide, which makes everyone untrustworthy. As in those stories, the pleasure comes not from a nuanced character or a clever bit of dialogue but from the attempt to discover the villains amid red herrings and double bluffs. It takes surprising risks, too. Twists and cliffhangers are to be expected from any drama, but “Bodyguard” seemingly killed off Montague in the third episode. That encouraged more puzzle-solving: was Jed Mercurio, the show’s creator, dropping clues with her name? After all, in “Romeo and Juliet”, Shakespeare’s characters seem dead when they’re not. When Budd later shoots himself in the temple—grief-stricken and flooded with guilt after Montague’s death—someone has inserted blanks in the magazine. Mr Mercurio, whose past credits include “Line of Duty”, another police-procedural thriller, has said in interviews that he found dramas with “can’t-die” characters dull. “I think there’s a certain expectation with series TV that it will always orbit around an equilibrium, in which nothing much changes for the main stars.” But most of all, the towering popularity of “Bodyguard” is a result of its uncanniness. While Britain’s real-life terrorist threat level is classified as severe, a television show depicting the nation grappling with the problem is shocking and absorbing. The fictional world lies on the peripheries of the real one—creating a similar feel to “The Handmaid’s Tale”—and Mr Mercurio’s dark scenario has tapped into a mood of uncertainty, political rivalry and paranoia about government surveillance. Only Theresa May, who was home secretary for six years before becoming prime minister, has declared that she is not a fan: “I watch TV to unwind—I’m not sure a drama about a female home secretary is the best way for me to do that.” Everyone else is counting down the hours until the finale on September 23rd, in the hope that their questions will be answered. “Bodyguard” is available on iPlayer and will be released on Netflix on October 24th