In 1919, as the British empire lost its grip on Ireland and the old rules of imperialism faded into irrelevance, the poet W.B.Yeats wrote that “Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold.” Almost 100 years later, our post-war institutions are being undermined by technological innovation and changing attitudes of the public. As ever, centres of power are constantly shifting and many of those who seek to influence the world find themselves playing by an outdated set of rules. “Power has gone wild,” says Carl Miller. “We desperately need to build new cages for power.” Mr Miller is a research director in online technology at Demos, a British think-tank, and author of “The Death of the Gods: The New Global Power Grab.” In it, he tracks how the internet and social media is enabling new groups to wield influence in new ways, yet how authority is also becoming more concentrated among a handful of dominant players. We asked Mr Miller five questions for him to answer in fewer than 100 words. Below that is an excerpt from his book. *       *       * The Economist: You've written about the ways technology is transforming power. What's the biggest difference between our perception of where power is and where it's actually going? Carl Miller: We think we live in a society shaped by rules and law. But we’re living through the worst law enforcement crisis in the history of modern policing. Hackers—on all sides of the law—have risen to become a new power elite. Professional media is collapsing but civic journalists are breaking huge stories. Software companies are exploding to the top of industry after industry, largely unencumbered by the anti-monopoly laws of the past. As power flows through the technology, it has broken out of all the cages—regulation, professional standards, the law, public scrutiny—that used to contain it. Power has gone wild. The Economist: How can we hold these emerging centres of power to account? Mr Miller: We desperately need to build new cages for power. A Royal Society of Technologists. Ethics-by-design coded into every platform. Digital citizenship taught in schools. A major digital literacy programme available in libraries. The whole fabric of rules, norms and laws needs to be updated. Calling for new laws and regulations is easy. The difficulty is to know how to do it quickly enough. The way power works is changing as quickly as the technology that it flows through. To work out how to get rules, laws and norms have to move just as fast; that is one of the main challenges of our generation. The Economist: In the last two years, many have started to believe that social media is leading to greater levels of polarisation. Are they right, and if so, why should we be optimistic about digital media? Mr Miller: Polarisation, especially in America, had been happening for decades before social media arrived. I see the role of digital media a little differently. It’s letting groups—all groups—act on whatever beliefs they hold. Political mobilisation used to be expensive and difficult. Now it is free and easy. Mobilisations and counter-mobilisations have erupted across the far reaches of the political spectrum. Feminists, meninists, anti-corruption activists, ultra-nationalists, #blacklivesmatter, #bluelivesmatter: there seems to be no one particular political direction that has benefited more from the internet. But the money, experience and machinery of the political mainstream matter a lot less than they used to. And that has ripped politics wide open. The mainstream is being challenged by everything that isn’t itself. The Economist: Most people are incapable of reading and understanding algorithms. In the years ahead, will the ability to read code determine our ability to comprehend power structures? Mr Miller: To almost all of us, the things we carry in our pockets might as well be small black-boxes of magic. But there is a community united by a mindset dedicated to knowing how technology works. I found them in the police, and as criminals, in GCHQ, in radical technology co-operatives and in their thousands at their largest annual gathering, DEFCON in Las Vegas. They are hackers. Hackers have a completely different relationship to the world around them from the rest of us. They understand how technology works, so they understand how the world works. And that has meant they don’t only understand power, but they also have it. They, or certainly the most capable and successful of their number, are a strange new kind of ruling class, often able to shape and influence the world around them in breathtaking ways. The Economist: You've written that power is now more accessible to each of us, but around the world, populists seem to be winning elections by appealing to a perceived lack of agency among electorates. Are individuals more powerful than they realise, and if so how should they exercise it? Mr Miller: “The Death of the Gods” is full of the stories of people who realised that amazing opportunities were at their fingertips. The details-obsessed citizen journalist who’d begun arguing in the comment threads of The Guardian and ended up on the front page of the New York Times. The high-school drop-out and civic hacker who became the Digital Minister of Taiwan. The systems administrator who comes home from work every day and becomes a kind of cyber-batman, plunging into the scariest parts of the internet to try to save people from the dangers lurking there. Power is more available, but that doesn’t mean it’s more equal. They did what hardly any of us actually do: not only see an opportunity, but act decisively and with vision. They are brave enough, really, to change their lives to embrace it. *       *       * From “The Death of the Gods: The New Global Power Grab,” by Carl Miller (Penguin RandomHouse, 2018): Audrey had dropped out of school at fourteen, and had her own technology start-up at fifteen. She had been a Silicon Valley entrepreneur and by thirty a civic hacker. But then, in 2016, to bring this new politics into being, she was appointed by the new incoming government first as a minister without portfolio, and then, in October, as the Digital Minister of Taiwan. She was the youngest minister in the cabinet, and the first transgender politician ever to hold office in Taiwan. But the thing that set Audrey apart most was that she was a completely new kind of politician. One who wanted to change not only what government did, but what government actually was. Audrey and the civic hackers saw the challenge of democracy as a problem of information. Voting was a single opportunity for a citizen to give off a political signal. But it was an incredibly weak signal. It wasn’t enough to let the government know what citizens felt about any issue, and it wasn’t enough for citizens to feel that they were being involved in the outcome. During an election, the choice facing the voter was already framed. The agenda already set. And the vote itself, in any given electoral system, might matter little to the outcome and therefore little to the candidates. Audrey brought G0v into government. They called their new organisation the Public Digital Innovation Space (PDIS). Their values were the same as the open source community: participation, accountability and transparency. The changes were tangible and wide-ranging. They worked on increasing the information flowing out of government. They made government data ‘open by default’. They created a dashboard to share government information to allow everyone to track fluctuations in vegetable prices during the typhoon season. They constructed a portal to share real-time information about disasters and emergencies. They built a working forum system to bridge the gap between officials and civil society, where ministries are required to respond to questions within seven days. They created participation officers – volunteers across the government who regularly meet to learn the ways of open government. As important as it was to increase the flow of information going from the government to citizens, they also needed to deal with the thorniest question of all. ‘Democracy’, said PDIS, ‘is defined as government by the people, but it is also the active participation of the people, as citizens in politics and civic life.’ They needed to find a way for Taiwanese citizens to give off more political signals back to the government. They need to collect the beliefs of the Taiwanese public on the issues that mattered to them. But beyond simply sharing their beliefs, the process needed to allow them to deliberate with each other constructively. And beyond even that, they needed to find a way for citizens to find what they had in common: to build consensus, a bedrock on which decisions could be based. VTaiwan [...] G0v began working with the team around a platform to help groups reach a consensus called pol.is, as a new way to make political decisions. As they would with any piece of software, they edged it forwards, constantly tweaking the process, constantly evaluating it and acting on feedback. They glued together the workings of government, the media and civic technology, especially pol.is into a process called vTaiwan. Before long, it faced a difficult test. The twelfth topic it was directed towards was a political controversy that Audrey called ‘an epidemic of the mind’. The issue was Uber. As PDIS got going, Uber had recently opened in Taiwan. Within the usual chorus of conflict and division, it was the job of vTaiwan to resolve how it should be regulated. G0v knew that direct democracy didn’t work if people didn’t agree on the basic facts. All sides needed to start deliberating based on a shared grounding of evidence. Under the vTaiwan process, the first stage was ‘objective’, with the aim of simply laying out the basic facts of what was known. Important articles and facts were put onto a Wikipedia timeline, and validated independently. The next stage was the most difficult: ‘reflection’. People from all sides came to share their feelings. Taipei taxi drivers, representatives of Uber, members of the government, business leaders, trade unions, taxi users, Uber services, all came to share their views. It was here that vTaiwan used pol.is. People with opinions across the Uber divide were asked to log on to the site. As they did so, a white screen appeared, and a single statement: ‘I think passenger liability insurance should be mandatory for riders on UberX private vehicles.’ No one could give an individualised response to this – you had to simply agree, disagree or pass. As people responded to the statement, pol.is showed them a map. On it were small circular avatars for each of the people that had answered the question. The people that agreed with you appeared in one group and people that disagreed in another. Then people were asked to draft their own statements, beginning with ‘My feeling is . . .’ [...] Over the first few days, pol.is kept visualising how opinions emerged, clustered, responded, divided and recombined. At first people shared strong feelings that appealed to other groups close by. Four broad groups of people soon emerged: taxi drivers, Uber drivers, Uber passengers, and other passengers. Eventually, those four groups turned into two. Group One clustered around a statement that wanted to flatly ban Uber. Seventy-five per cent agreed with: ‘Since the Ministry has already rejected Uber’s administrative appeal, I think Taipei city government should cancel the company registration of Taiwan Uber Inc.’ Group Two had clustered around another, completely different view: ‘When I am not in a hurry, I prefer to call Uber even if there are plenty of taxis in the street’ (77 per cent of Group Two thought this). This is the opposite of a consensus. This is polarisation. And if this was Twitter or Facebook, we’d see echo chambers, spats, competing online petitions and massively contradictory information flowing into politicians. We’d be getting nowhere. But pol.is produced something more useful than just feedback. ‘When people started using pol.is, we found that it became a consensus-generating mechanism,’ said Colin Megill, who worked on the project. People were asked to continue to draft statements, but the ones that were given visibility were those that found support not only from the drafter’s group, but the other groups as well. The process encouraged people to start posting more consensual, more nuanced statements. ‘Change the information structure,’ said Colin, ‘and you can tweak power.’ Group One toned down their original statement: ‘I think it is the responsibility of the Ministry to actively outlaw unlicensed passenger vehicles’ (87 per cent agreed). [...] Those consensus items fed into the next stage of vTaiwan: ‘interpretation’. The authors of the consensus statements joined other representatives and stakeholders who met face-to-face – livestreamed, published in open structured data, all fully transparent. They went through the facts and the consensus items shared on the pol.is platform, and tried to agree recommendations to be passed over to the government. Finally, the outcomes were coded into legalese. On May 23rd 2016, the Taiwanese government pledged to ratify all the pol.is consensus items: taxis no longer needed to be painted yellow; app-based taxis were free to operate as long as they didn’t undercut existing meters and so on. This was the ‘decisional’ part of the vTaiwan process. *** The process didn’t only give everyone a chance to speak. It also created empathy between the groups. When the Taipei High Administrative Court rejected Uber’s appeal on one of the finer points of the ruling, the Ministry’s press release stated: ‘We are grieved for and pity them; we do not feel joy at our own ability.’ On July 26th 2016, Taiwan’s new premier declared that ‘all substantial national issues should go through a vTaiwan-like process’. VTaiwan’s success over Uber was followed by another shortly after. It broke a six-year deadlock over the sale of alcohol online. It has been used to conclude about twenty disputes now, involving around 50,000 stakeholders, experts and members of the public. Five new cases, PDIS tell me, are on the way; two are under discussion. Eight times it has changed the law, and seven times it has changed regulation. So far, the issues have been primarily digital, affecting least the people least likely to use it. Baby steps? Perhaps. Technology has opened up new possibilities for how to answer that same basic question that Henry Parker struggled with almost four centuries ago: how do you put the people in charge? How can democracy practically work? Sometimes triggered by crisis, sometimes by generalised democratic discontent, groups of people around the world have begun to experiment with new systems. The philosophy of open source, joined with the technology that can make it happen, has begun to slowly shift the practices of governments around the world. ______________ Excerpted from “The Death of the Gods: The New Global Power Grab”. Copyright © 2018 by Carl Miller. Used with permission of Penguin RandomHouse. All rights reserved.