ARTISTS of all kinds have long understood that the personal is political. Autobiographies and family histories can provide insight into the impact of wars, policies and economies, whether that be proof of collective suffering or extraordinary survival. Film-makers, in particular, are making sense of a turbulent 20th century through a personal lens: “The Image You Missed” is one of many films at the Open City Documentary Festival in London to do so. It addresses the difficult relationship Dónal Foreman, the director, shared with his father as well as the “Troubles” in Northern Ireland. That conflict, between the province’s Protestants, who wanted to remain with the United Kingdom, and its Catholics, who sought a united Ireland, lasted 30 years and claimed 3,500 lives. Mr Foreman’s ancestors on the paternal side fled Ireland for America during the Great Famine in the 1840s. Arthur MacCaig, his father, grew up in a working-class area of New Jersey and trained as a film-maker in Paris, where he worked on documentaries about Northern Ireland. Maeve Foreman, his mother, lived in Ireland; her relatives participated in the Easter Rising in 1916. “The Image You Missed” does not provide details of MacCaig’s and Ms Foreman’s meeting or courtship. It opens in 1985, with a voice-over reading MacCaig’s evasive letter from France to Mr Foreman’s mother, pregnant, in Dublin. From there, it progresses along two timelines: a personal one taking the viewer through MacCaig’s life, Foreman’s childhood, and their occasional overlapping; a political one revisiting MacCaig’s footage and documentaries, which were sympathetic to the republican cause. Photographs, home movies and personal anecdotes are juxtaposed with scenes of civil unrest, British army tanks and the Irish Republican Army. The “you” in the film’s title is therefore a reproachful son addressing an absent father, but it is also meant for the audience, bombarded with ideas and stories of the past. The contrast between the two narrative strands makes for some of the film’s most poignant insights about history and identity. The Troubles seem to shape the two men’s understanding of their roots. It awakens in the American-born and Paris-based MacCaig a passion for his Irish ancestry and a sense of struggle, even as he visits only sporadically and is hardly interested in his son who lives there. In his footage, he narrates the events as a fight for liberation, akin to the French and American Revolutions. Mr Foreman, on the other hand, “never shared this idea of Irishness…Never cared for the parades, rituals or flags.” For the son, Ireland has meant the relatively peaceful Dublin, not the nationalist struggles of Belfast. Mr Foreman includes clips from his childhood experiments at film-making: re-enactments of home break-ins, arrests and shootings. MacCaig is heartened by peace talks and the Good Friday Agreement in 1998—the viewer is shown an interview where he expresses admiration for Northern Ireland’s new political attitude of negotiation and compromise. “You witnessed these changes: you even seemed to change along with them,” Mr Foreman says in a voice-over. “From guerrilla cinema to TV segment. From revolutionary to politician. From mask to make-up.” The film then shows the last meeting between the father and son in 2008, months before MacCaig died suddenly of a pulmonary embolism. The two directors talk of film-making and Ireland, side-stepping the subject of their own relationship. Mr Foreman overlays this conversation with footage of the politicians signing the agreement, and cameras panning over the names on a memorial to those killed during the conflict. The images of resolution and of suffering sit uneasily together. Though complex, this dual perspective makes sense. Mr Foreman’s search for his father is, after all, a simultaneous search for his Irish heritage and his purpose as a film-maker. Nor would it have been possible to make sense of the Troubles in one lifetime: MacCaig shoots the lead-up to 1968 and the first two politically charged decades of the conflict while Mr Foreman, coming of age after peace in 1998, reveals the ways in which it continues to reverberate in his generation. It has echoed this year, the agreement’s 20th anniversary, during Brexit negotiations which have raised questions of borders, identity and Northern Ireland’s status once more. Mr Foreman’s excavation of a familial rift unearths stories without neat conclusions. Yet some common ground is nevertheless found. Despite working in different climates, the perspectives of father and son, at least, meet on the subject of documentary film-making. They believe in the power of images and, as Mr Foreman said in an interview, the importance of “conjuring ghosts, not getting rid of them”. The Open City Documentary Festival runs in London from September 4th—9th