TYPICAL, isn’t it? You make an in-depth two-hour drama chronicling a decade in the life of a pioneering astronaut, culminating in his moon walk in 1969, but the scene which gets all the headlines is one you didn’t include. “First Man” is a biopic of Neil Armstrong, starring Ryan Gosling. It was directed by Damien Chazelle, who won an Oscar for directing “La La Land”, and it was scripted by Josh Singer, the screenwriter of “Spotlight”, for which he also won an Oscar. But instead of debating the film’s own Oscar potential when it debuted at Venice Film Festival last week, reporters noted that Mr Chazelle “abolishes”—to quote the review from the Guardian—the moment when Armstrong and his fellow astronaut, Buzz Aldrin, planted the American flag on the lunar surface. This omission led to “First Man” being condemned online as outrageously unpatriotic by the type of people who snipped the swoosh logos off their socks after Nike employed Colin Kaepernick (people, incidentally, who had not seen the film). More significant was that Mr Aldrin himself disapproved of the ellipsis. He posted a photo on Instagram of Armstrong and himself raising Old Glory, and added the hashtag “#proudtobeanAmerican”. But maybe it was not just the film’s lack of jingoism that he disapproved of. Maybe he was disgruntled that his younger self (played by Corey Stoll) is portrayed as such a tactless loudmouth. “I’m just saying what everyone is thinking,” he sneers after one crass remark. “Maybe you shouldn’t,” snaps Armstrong. For the record, the flag is clearly visible on the Moon in “First Man”, even if we don’t see it being put there. But it is true that anyone hoping for a hymn to American exceptionalism will be disappointed. Mr Chazelle’s fast-moving, hair-raising yet thoughtful film shows events from Armstrong’s own tightly focused perspective: we don’t see how majestic a soaring rocket is from the outside, for instance, but how bone-rattlingly noisy and uncomfortable it is on the inside. And Armstrong, as depicted here, isn’t driven by a desire to make America great again, or to overtake the Soviets in the space race—although some of his colleagues have that contest on their minds. He isn’t interested in national borders. When he is interviewed for a job at NASA, he says that travelling beyond the earth’s atmosphere as a test pilot gave him a more global vision. Then there is his famous mention of a “giant leap for mankind”, rather than a giant leap for the USA. So does Armstrong go to the Moon in order to inspire humanity as a whole? The film’s other, more intriguing, suggestion is that he doesn’t know why he is going: he just knows he has to. Early in the film, his young daughter Karen dies of a brain tumour, but Armstrong, beautifully underplayed by Mr Gosling, goes straight back to work. Later, there are powerful scenes in which several of his friends are killed as they try out experimental new technology. But, similarly, Armstrong accepts these deaths as part of the research and development process. Whatever happens, he and his steely wife (Claire Foy) get on with the job in hand, with none of the rhetoric or histrionics there would be in a more conventional Hollywood biopic. Some critics in Venice responded to this quiet stoicism by complaining that Armstrong was a boring character, as if space travel weren’t riveting enough in itself. But your correspondent was moved to see how reserved and professional someone could be, having been through so much. The fact that Armstrong persists with his mission without explaining what it means to him leaves the question open to the viewer; the result is that “First Man” is far more fascinating and profound than if he had simply been a gung-ho adventurer or a true-blue flag-waver. And when he finally does make that giant leap for mankind, the sequence is both breathtaking and melancholy, because the cold, stark, alien landscape he steps onto seems to be where he belongs. He had to go to the Moon, the film hints, because he isn’t at home on earth.