IN THE hazy late-July sun, festival-goers at Biarritz en été meandered to the main stage. Their ankles were flecked with mud; their stomachs were full of Toulousian fare. But the hypnotic melodies and beats of “Aqualand” by Polo & Pan, a French electronic duo, proved compelling: transfixed and transported to imaginary lands, the audience swayed with ease. Call it “electro-pop” or just plain pop; it hardly matters. Musicians vow their music is genreless, yet many speak of the same “tropical” feel or “cosmic vibe”—a light sound where groove takes centre stage. Artists experiment with synths and strings, and reference a host of other sub-genres such as Brazilian house and Trap, a type of hip-hop. They embrace and rework the cheesy chansons of their parents’ generation. Themes of a carefree existence recur. Listeners the world over are duly taking note. The music is a product of the “new wave of creativity” spreading across France, says Armand Bultheel, one half of Agar Agar. While Bordeaux is a hotspot for up-and-coming garage musicians and Lyon is a haven for electronic purists, electro-pop is mostly a Parisian phenomenon. The capital’s artistic crowd and close-knit musical community—so close that some French folk bemoan it is really just a gaggle of wealthy “Versailles kids”—makes it the ideal “meeting point” for musicians interested in this kind of experimentation, notes Mr Bultheel. For Julian Catala, the organiser of Biarritz’s festival, it is “French touch 2.0”. That term was originally applied to the group of artists such as Daft Punk and Air who made their name in the early 2000s. They not only created a new sound—layering disco classics with house beats and the rhythms of 1980s American groove—but breathed life into an otherwise outdated and outshined French music scene. They then transported their sound across continents: Daft Punk’s cosmic outfits became instantly recognisable, showing that the French still had that musical je ne sais quoi. These musicians are French in tone and in tongue: singing in their native language is increasingly the norm rather than the exception. Most are chic bands taking inspiration from French lyricists such as Françoise Hardy, or local rap artists that top the streaming charts in the country. So far this year, only one non-French artist, Ed Sheeran, made the top 20 according to SNEP, a trade body. That Anglophone audiences might struggle to understand their songs is of little concern to most musicians: even Frenchmen will miss most of the lyrics says Charles de Boisseguin, a member of L’Imperatrice, an electro-pop sextet (pictured). Their words delight in double meanings and fantastical imagery because really “what matters is the melody and the way it makes you groove”. Julia Jean-Baptiste, the lead singer of Pendentif, another such band, agrees: her group adjusts the level of the vocals “to allow them to blend with the synthesisers”. They become just another instrument, another layer of a multi-faceted song. The reasons for this new wave of creativity are hard to pinpoint. Some critics point to policy: a generous government stipend, known as the intermittents du spectacle, allows musicians to live virtually rent-free, so long as they can prove they are “active”. Since 1994, a quota that requires French radio stations to allocate at least 35% (down from 40% in 2015) of airtime to French songs has also ensured artists get the exposure they need. Others think the influence is musical, pointing to La Femme, a band that, on failing to inspire interest among labels in their own country, decided to tour America instead. Their eclectic style—often described as psychedelic 1960s surf rock—and catchy, sometimes nonsensical, lyrics, resonated with an international audience and showed other musicians in France that “it is possible to sing in French and still be cool,” says Mr Boisseguin. Others still consider the feel-good music a sort of rebellion against tragedy at home. In an interview, Phoenix, an electronic rock band, noted how after the Paris attacks in 2015 they wanted to produce a sound “that would bring light back to the city”. And just as the first “French touch” movement found fans across the globe, so too this generation of artists is finding fans far from France. Polo & Pan are selling out venues across Europe and America. The Blaze, an electronic duo, this year performed at Coachella, a star-studded festival in Palm Springs, California. Petit Biscuit, a DJ whose hit “Sunset Lover” has amassed more than 280m streams on Spotify, is halfway through a global tour. Cinema’s status as the country’s most important cultural export is under threat as French music finds a new groove.