WHAT Usain Bolt did for the 100-metre dash, Eliud Kipchoge just did for the marathon. On September 16th, in this year’s Berlin Marathon, the 33-year-old Kenyan didn’t merely edge the existing world record of 2:02:57, set four years ago by Dennis Kimetto, his countryman, on the same course. Instead, he obliterated it, running a near-perfect race in cooperative conditions and setting a new standard at 2:01:39. The 78-second improvement is the largest margin represented by a new marathon record in more than 50 years. It represents a leap for Mr Kipchoge that his contemporaries will find extremely difficult to match at the 26.2-mile (42.2-km) distance. For most of the current century, the men’s marathon world record has crept forward in fits and starts, from Khalid Khannouchi’s 2:05:38 at the 2002 London Marathon to Mr Kimetto’s best. Four other runners set five separate short-lived marks in the intervening years. This the usual state of affairs in athletics: steady, incremental upticks resulting from slight improvements in training, nutrition and the overall level of competition. But as Mr Bolt demonstrate a decade ago in his signature event, record progressions aren’t always linear. His 100-metre dash world record of 9.58 seconds—untouched for nearly ten years with no challenger in sight—is 0.09 seconds, or 1.1%, better than his own previous best of 9.69 seconds. Before Mr Bolt took over the top spot, an improvement of one-tenth of a second took four different record-setting sprinters more than a decade. On Sunday, Mr Kipchoge matched Mr Bolt, taking a full percent off the previous best at his own distance, and posting a race time that could stand as long as Mr Bolt’s 9.58. A new marathon record was due, but no one expected the Kenyan to knock so much time off the all-time best. Every time Mr Kipchoge steps up to the starting line, the record is in danger. He has won ten of the 11 marathons he has entered, and at the 2016 London Marathon, he set a then-best of 2:03:05, only eight seconds off Mr Kimetto’s mark. Last May, in Monza, Italy, he was the centerpiece of Nike’s Breaking2, a promotional stunt that staged a marathon-distance run and gave competitors a number of advantages not allowed in certified races, including rotating pace-setters for the entire distance and the shelter of a time-keeping Tesla to further limit wind resistance. Mr Kipchoge completed the Monza course in 2:00:25, a time that failed to satisfy Nike’s moon-shot goal of a sub-two-hour marathon, but further established that the Kenyan was in world-record shape. An official record attempt in Berlin last year came to naught, as wet weather slowed him to a 2:03:32 finish. Another try at the London Marathon on April 22nd was hindered by overly aggressive pacing early in the race, as well as the hottest conditions in the race’s history. Although this year’s course in Berlin was several degrees warmer than the ideal, it was also dry. Mr Kipchoge maintained an even pace throughout the first half, reaching the midpoint in 61:06. That was a few seconds slower than he managed in London, but still well ahead of a world-record pace. He then somehow increased his speed in the second half, running the final 13.1 miles in 60:33, despite little assistance from pace-setters and no pressure from other racers. The Berlin course has become the default option for record-seekers. Its flat, gently-curving route has been the site of the last seven world-best times. What is striking about Mr Kipchoge’s performance, however, is that he posted such a transcendent mark when many outside factors didn’t go quite right. The temperature was 14 degrees Celsius (58 degrees Fahrenheit) at the start, considerably warmer than the optimal four degrees Celsius. According to the relationships published in one academic paper, that difference alone should be associated with a 1.4% drop in speed. Next, the trio of pace-setters hired by the race’s organisers were expected to stick with Mr Kipchoge (and lessen wind resistance) through 30 km, but the last of the three dropped out at 25 km. Finally, Mr Kipchoge faced no competition. Last year Guye Adola, an Ethiopian marathon debutant, gave chase and briefly overtook him within 5 km of the finish line. This time, Mr Kipchoge ran the final ten miles alone and unchallenged, with Amos Kipruto, the runner-up, nearly five minutes back. On a perfect day, then, even the stunning new record of 2:01:39 could fall. But like Mr Bolt in his heyday, Mr Kipchoge is the only man in today’s field with a reasonable shot of besting it. The Kenyan has defied the trends that often beset marathoners, avoiding injury and sustaining a peak at the 26.2-mile distance for a half-decade. Many of his peers have only able to post world-class times for a couple of years. Mr Kimetto is only ten months older than Mr Kipchoge is, but injuries have prevented him from finishing a race since 2016. Of the seven other men who have run a certified marathon in less than 2:04:00, only Mr Adola is active, injury-free, and under the age of 36. Still, as Mr Kipchoge’s near-misses have shown, perfect days are hard to come by. In a single race, Mr Kipchoge nearly halved the gap between the all-time record and the big round number in the marathon’s sights, the two-hour mark. In the 20 years before Sunday’s race, the record decreased by an average of 9.4 seconds per year. Even after Mr Kipchoge bettered the record by another eight years’ worth, that leaves more than a decade of similar improvement to go. And that’s to say nothing of theoretical approaches that suggest the absolute limit of human capability lies somewhere in between, like one statistical technique that, in 2008, netted an ultimate best of 2:00:47. Given the Bolt-like dominance that Mr Kipchoge has shown over the rest of the marathoning fraternity, we shouldn’t expect incremental improvements on the 26.2-mile record anytime soon. Like the sprinter’s 9.58, the distance runner’s 2:01:39 is likely to withstand all challengers for some time, until a new generation arrives with the skills to supplant it. Until then, the two-hour marathon will have to wait.