RUSSIAN sport is coming in from the cold. On September 20th the executive committee of the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) voted to provisionally reinstate the Russian Anti-Doping Agency (RUSADA), an important step towards reintegrating the country and its athletes into international sport. RUSADA, which facilitated a state-sponsored scheme to replace positive urine samples with clean ones during the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, has been banned since November 2015. It has not met two of WADA’s original criteria for reinstatement: an acknowledgement of the severity of its violations and the release of data and samples from the Moscow Laboratory, the centre of its illicit operations. Last week’s decision softens those criteria. RUSADA now has until December 31st to reveal its database, and until June 30th next year to provide samples for retesting. Athletes’ committees, sporting federations, and other national anti-doping agencies have immediately seen the vote for what it is: a craven move that allows Russia to save face and edge its way back into the good graces of international sport, while showing the rest of the world that powerful countries need not play by the rules. WADA’s forgiveness suits the International Olympic Committee (IOC), which provides half of WADA’s funding and committee members, and which wants to bring Russia back into the fold. Doing so means that the country can bid for hosting rights at major events. Indeed, immediately after RUSADA’s reinstatement, Kazan was named on the shortlist of hosts for the 2023 European Games, an Olympic-style event for the continent. WADA’s feeble decision has undermined its explicit purpose, which is to keep sport clean. In its compromise with stubborn Russian officials, the agency softened its demand that RUSADA should acknowledge the findings of the McLaren report, an investigation in 2016 that demonstrated the Russian government’s conspiracy to hide evidence of pervasive doping. Instead, WADA accepted a considerably weaker statement from the sports minister, Pavel Kolobkov, who “fully accepted the decision of the International Olympic Committee executive board that was made based on the findings of the Schmid Report.” The Schmid report confirmed many of the McLaren report’s findings—but stopped short of assigning blame to “the highest State authority”. Both reports made clear that, wherever the buck stops, the level of doping and the effort to cover it up represent the worst offences since East Germany’s state-sponsored scheme in the 1980s. Beginning in 2010, a series of whistleblowers revealed an extensive doping programme to WADA, which culminated in a coordinated effort by several organs of state power (including the Federal Security Service (FSB), the successor to the KGB) to maximise Russia’s medal count at the Sochi games. After a series of WADA investigations, 13 medallists from Sochi were stripped of their awards, 111 athletes were prevented from competing at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, and Russian competitors were required to participate under a neutral flag at this year’s Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang. RUSADA’s reinstatement does not fully return Russian sport to its pre-ban footing. But it is the biggest step in that direction since the IOC overlooked two positive drugs tests during the Pyeongchang games and restored the status of the Russian Olympic Committee three days after the closing ceremony. The agency will once again be able to certify its own athletes and issue therapeutic-use exemptions for prohibited substances. The remaining obstacles for Russian competitors are the few governing bodies that have taken anti-doping discipline into their own hands. The most prominent is the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF), which governs track-and-field events and is unhappy with WADA’s decision. The IAAF independently banned Russian athletes from its competitions in 2015. Though RUSADA’s return to WADA’s good graces is one of the IAAF’s criteria for reinstatement, the athletics association appears determined to stick to its remaining demands, which include acknowledgement of the McLaren report. The International Paralympic Committee has established another path, which involves repayment of testing-related costs and, once again, a statement regarding the McLaren findings. Russia’s weightlifting team is also serving a one-year suspension for failed drugs tests. In the eyes of many athletes, these sporting bodies, despite their need to balance anti-doping efforts with other priorities, are fulfilling a role that WADA has abandoned. WADA’s committee for athletes gives its members a platform, but little power. After WADA’s compliance committee recommended reinstating RUSADA ahead of Thursday’s vote, Canadian skier Beckie Scott, both a member of the compliance body and the head of the athlete committee, resigned from the former. Athletes are right to be concerned. A global anti-doping body without WADA’s conflicted interests is crucial to maintain clean sport, and alternatives are thin on the ground. In June the IOC launched its own International Testing Agency, but it is hard to imagine an IOC-funded entity representing an improvement. Institutions like the IAAF may police their own events, but dozens of smaller federations would struggle to do the same. In 2015 the Danish Institute of Sports Studies graded all of the Olympic-affiliated federations. It found that only one—the International Federation for Equestrian Sports—met its “basic criteria of good governance.” To take just one example, the IOC suspended payments to the International Biathlon Union this year after an Austrian police investigation alleged that the organisation had taken bribes to cover up Russian doping cases over a span of six years. (Two of its former employees deny those charges.) It is still possible for WADA to show that it can serve as a global anti-doping patrol. But by weakening its own sanctions and alienating athletes, it has made that task harder. Having caved on Russia’s acknowledgement of the McLaren report, the agency must hold firm on its demand for delivery of physical and digital evidence that will shed more light on past offences. If the recent compromise loosens Russia’s grip on incriminating evidence, then WADA can sort through the archives and gradually close the door on one of sport’s most sordid scandals. But if the vote is an indication that anti-doping efforts are yet again being suppressed by the needs of governing bodies like the IOC, then cheating officials will continue to see WADA as little more than a pest. The world’s athletes and fans deserve better.