THE moment should have been Naomi Osaka’s to savour. On September 8th the 20-year-old Japanese rising star won her first-ever grand-slam title, with a resounding 6-2, 6-4 victory over her idol, Serena Williams (pictured, right), who has won 23 major championships. The final match capped a dominating fortnight for Ms Osaka, who dropped only a single set in seven matches, and will improve her world ranking from 19th to 7th, the first time she has entered the top ten. In the wake of the match, however, the public’s attention focused not on Ms Osaka’s achievement, but rather on a series of on-court disputes between Ms Williams and Carlos Ramos (left), the chair umpire. The trouble began when Mr Ramos issued Ms Williams a warning for coaching after spotting Patrick Mouratoglou, her coach, making hand signals early in the second set. There is no penalty attached to a first warning. However, Ms Williams immediately took up the argument, saying, “I don’t cheat to win. I’d rather lose.” A few games later, at 3-2, after Ms Williams lost a service game to cancel out the one-break advantage she had built over Ms Osaka, she smashed her racquet, an automatic code violation. Because of the earlier warning for coaching, the racquet-abuse violation resulted in a one-point penalty. Ms Osaka won the following three points to level the set at three games apiece, then broke Ms Williams’s serve again for a 4-3 lead. Ms Williams continued to spar with Mr Ramos at the change of ends. She demanded an apology for his first warning, and finally called him a “thief” who stole the point from her earlier in the set. According to grand-slam rules, an implication of dishonesty qualifies as verbal abuse—another code violation. As a result, Mr Ramos assessed the third penalty, now a full game. That left Ms Osaka one game away from the title. Amid a great deal of commotion in Arthur Ashe Stadium, two more service holds sealed the match in Ms Osaka’s favour. Mr Ramos is one of the most respected officials in tennis. He has chaired ten major finals, as well as the men’s gold-medal match at the 2012 Summer Olympics. He is known as a stickler, and on the surface, each of his decisions was a proper application of the rules. But in tennis, it is never that simple. While racquet abuse is a near-automatic violation, coaching is left to the umpire’s discretion. Mid-match coaching is ubiquitous, both in verbal and hand-signal form, yet officials rarely cite players for it. In an earlier kerfuffle at the same tournament, Andy Murray observed his opponent, Fernando Verdasco, openly chatting with his coaching team during a ten-minute break for extreme heat. Mr Verdasco got off without a warning. Although Mr Mouratoglou later admitted that he was indeed trying to send signals to Ms Williams, she insists that she did not “receive” any coaching during the match. In the context of real-life enforcement, the final violation Mr Ramos levied against Ms Williams, for verbal abuse, was just as iffy. Nothing Ms Williams said in this year’s final equals her two previous high-profile verbal-abuse incidents in New York. In a 2009 semi-final against Kim Clijsters, she was assessed a match-ending point penalty after she threatened to “shove the ball down [the] throat” of a lineswoman. Two years later, in the championship match against Samantha Stosur, she responded to a hindrance violation by telling umpire Eva Asderaki that, among other things, “You're a hater and you're just ... unattractive inside.” By comparison, calling Mr Ramos a thief rates as standard fare for a frustrated competitor. Many umpires, regardless of the letter of the law, would have measured the severity of the violation against the magnitude of the moment and opted against levying the third penalty, perhaps offering another informal warning. Ms Williams presumably knows what the rulebook says, but can be forgiven for acting in accordance with standards that officials usually tolerate. The controversial match draws attention to the ambiguity of tennis’s rulebook at a time when the lords of the sport are actively trying to make its policies clearer. The camera-based challenge system is in use at most tour-level events, including every court in New York, giving players more confidence in the closest line calls. After years of squabbling about inconsistent enforcement of a 20- or 25-second time limit between points, the US Open this year became the first major to use a countdown timer before each first serve. The United States Tennis Association (USTA), which runs the Open, is also running trials in which coaching is permitted, including in the qualifying rounds of last year’s and this year’s tournament. Verbal abuse will surely remain at the discretion of officials, but umpires’ latitude is shrinking in these other domains. The tennis world will probably be debating Mr Ramos’s calls until the next major rolls around in January. But one thing should not be in doubt: Ms Osaka didn’t need his help to earn her first grand slam title. Excluding the five penalty-determined points, she won 60 of the 110 points played, good for 64% on her own service and 45% on return. A ratio of that quality almost guarantees victory. In addition, all five of the points Ms Williams was docked would have been played on Ms Osaka’s serve. Given the level that the 20-year-old sustained, the first point penalty increased her chances of winning by less than half a percentage point, from 97.8% to 98.2%. Even if Ms Williams had been able to raise her level to equal her opponent’s, the impact would have been less than two percentage points. The game penalty was worth barely a full percentage point, boosting Ms Osaka’s probability of victory from 98.1% to 99.2%. By the time the New York crowd started booing, the match was virtually in the bag. Saturday’s match tested Ms Osaka with the best and worst tennis has to offer. In her first grand-slam final, she maintained the superior level of play that got her there and defeated one of the greatest competitors in tennis history. At the same time, she ignored the sort of distractions that can only arise on the sport’s biggest stages, outperforming her opponent before, between, and after the arguments and penalties that so captured the crowd’s attention. The match will be remembered for its showdown between Ms Williams and Mr Ramos, but its true importance is simpler: a springboard for Ms Osaka, one of the game’s most promising young stars.