PUNK, so the saying went, was as much a mindset as it was a genre of music. Its fans were angry and antagonistic, their Mohawks, ripped clothes and leather jackets symbols of their contempt for popular culture. They matched heavy guitar riffs and rough, raspy choruses with political critique: in Britain, the Sex Pistols lashed out at the monarchy’s “fascist regime”, Elvis Costello condemned the Falklands war and the Clash offered an apocalyptic vision of London where the “ice age is coming, the sun is zooming in / Meltdown expected, the wheat is growin’ thin”. Punks were against the government and the system, and they demanded to be heard. In 1976 the Times thought that it was “the intimation of a more ominous elemental force”. A year later, The Economist said that if punk “causes Mr Callaghan, Mrs Thatcher and the rest to wonder why Britain’s young people go round with safety pins in their noses, it may serve a useful purpose”. As punk gave way to rave culture in the 1980s, rage was replaced with messages of unity and belonging. Other genres, particularly hip-hop, took up the protest banner and addressed inequality, poverty and alienation. Today it is grime, a strain of rap music that emerged in the early 2000s, which most often takes aim at politicians. In 2017 Stormzy, a rapper, used his performance at the Brit Awards to ask: “Theresa May, where’s the money for Grenfell?”, a reference to the fire in a tower block in 2017 that killed 72 people. Yet in the wake of the British government’s austerity policies and various political and demographic divides, punk is once again giving voice to young people’s frustrations (albeit with fewer safety pins). IDLES, a band from Bristol, released their debut album, “Brutalism”, last year. It covered the state of the NHS (“A loved one perished at the hand of the baron-hearted right”), the class system (“Why don’t you get a degree? Even Tarquin has a degree”) and feminism (“Men are scared women will laugh in their face / Whereas women are scared it’s their lives men will take”). The album was lauded by critics; Uncut, a music magazine, called it “a rare rock record with the rage, urgency, wit and shattering of complacency usually found in grime.” It has a score of 88 on Metacritic, a review-aggregator site, indicating “universal acclaim”. Their follow-up album, “Joy as an Act of Resistance”, released last month, is similarly apposite as it reflects on immigration, political divides and “toxic masculinity”. Like the first proponents of punk, who were articulating a sense of despair among Britain’s working class, here IDLES reflect on their upbringings. In “I’m Scum” they take ownership of words once used as insults: “I'm council house and violent”, “I’m lefty, I’m soft”, “I’m minimum wage job”. Joe Talbot, the lead singer, told NPR that the song’s rhythm is meant to evoke a march. “I wanted it to be a celebration, a defiant parade of all the things.” “Danny Nedelko”, a more melodic track, is similarly defiant in its defence of immigration. Named after a Ukrainian friend of the band, the song is a reminder that “he’s made of bones, he’s made of blood / He’s made of flesh, he’s made of love”. The thrashing, clashing guitars convey anger not with the subject, but with the fact that “fear leads to panic, panic leads to pain / Pain leads to anger, anger leads to hate”. Other tracks go on the offensive. “Great” conveys disenchantment with Brexit, and mocks those who voted to leave the European Union. Over pacy drums and a thrumming baseline, the lyrics begin by stating that “Blighty wants his country back” and decries the “wombic charm of the Union Jack”. Disinformation and xenophobia—“Islam didn’t eat your hamster”—has led to “burning bridges and closing doors”; a refrain reminds the listener that “change isn’t a crime”. The pained, bellowing vocals belie the sentiment that “we’re all in this together”. What IDLES do differently to their punk forebears is reflect inwards and scrutinise their rage. In “Brutalism”, Mr Talbot explored the untimely death of his mother. Vulnerability is an overarching theme of the second album, with some tracks stripping back the instrumentation to emphasise the vocals. Over a plaintive organ in “June”, Mr Talbot grieves for his stillborn daughter and the “baby shoes for sale: never worn”. “Samaritans” attacks “the mask of masculinity”, the demand that men “don’t cry”, keep their “chin up” and “drink up” and the way this behaviour is passed from father to son. “Television” says that you can “love yourself” and restore self-confidence if you “smash mirrors and fuck TV”. As punk music celebrated its 40th anniversary in 2016, critics opined that in a febrile political climate “maybe what we need are some punks, challenging attitudes again and delivering a shock to the system”. Listeners seem to agree. “Joy as an Act of Resistance” has reached number five in the British album charts and received a number of glowing reviews. It also boasts a score of 88 on Metacritic. But as the title suggests, challenging prevailing political and social attitudes does not always mean criticism, anger and broken guitars—sometimes it means channelling that energy into celebration of what makes the world a better place.