ABORTION-RIGHTS activists, concerned about how Brett Kavanaugh, President Donald Trump’s pick for the Supreme Court, regards Roe v Wade, now have a new worry. On September 10th, a three-judge panel on the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals vacated a lower-court ruling that had blocked Missouri from enforcing regulations that could shutter all but one of the state’s abortion clinics. The decision does not mention that abortion rights may soon become vulnerable with the confirmation of Justice Anthony Kennedy's more conservative successor. But there is ample subtext in the bland 14-page opinion from Judge Bobby Shepherd that bodes ill for women's right to reproductive liberty. Missouri holds abortion clinics to two weakly justified standards: “physical design and layout requirements” including widened hallways, and a requirement that abortion providers be “privileged to perform surgical procedures in at least one licensed hospital” nearby. In 2016, the Supreme Court ruled 5-3 that a very similar package of regulations in Texas violated the constitutional right to abortion choice. Writing for the majority in Whole Woman's Health v Hellerstedt, Justice Stephen Breyer noted that “neither of these provisions offers medical benefits sufficient to justify the burdens upon access that each imposes”. The rules place ”a substantial obstacle in the path of women seeking a pre-viability abortion” in violation of the 1992 Planned Parenthood v Casey decision holding that regulations may not put an “undue burden” on a women’s choice. The Missouri rules differ from Texas’s in two notable ways. The physical-plant requirement is, formally at least, less onerous than the one the justices struck down in 2016 since it permits clinics that do not measure up architecturally to file for waivers. The Eighth Circuit panel latched onto this potential for carve-outs to argue that it didn’t know enough about how the waiver programme functioned to determine if the rule itself constituted an unconstitutional burden. But the hospital-relationship requirement is another story. Whereas Texas required abortion providers to have admitting privileges at a hospital within a 30-minute radius, Missouri required them to be able to perform surgery at a hospital no more than a 15-minute drive away. How did Judge Shepherd justify letting this stringent requirement go into effect when the Supreme Court determined that its much more modest cousin constituted a clear infringement on a woman’s right to choose? The reasoning is puzzlingly weak. The court’s analysis in Hellerstedt was, “of course” related to “abortion in Texas”. There was “[n]o such determination about abortion in Missouri” in the new case (Comprehensive Health v. Hawley), he wrote, as if procedures to end pregnancies might be unrecognisable as one passes across state lines. “Perhaps there was a unique problem Missouri was responding to” that could justify its rules, Judge Shepherd wrote. Given that purported uncertainty, the lower-court’s injunction against the policy should be lifted and the state should have a chance to explain to the same court how its rules serve the cause of, rather than block access to, women’s reproductive health. Though the reasoning is puzzling, Judge Shepherd’s opinion in Hawley sounds nothing like an anti-abortion screed. That is a change for him. In 2015, Judge Shepherd peddled several questionable pro-life talking points in a ruling striking down a North Dakota law that would have banned abortion as early as six weeks of pregnancy. Roe is the law of the land, he wrote, but it is ludicrous and should be revisited. An unborn child is viable mere days after conception; women are often coerced into aborting their fetuses; and North Dakotans should be free to ban abortion at the detection of a fetal heartbeat. Three years ago, this was the astonishing cry of a pro-life judge citing pseudo-science to undermine a four-decade-old precedent of the Supreme Court. In 2018, in Hawley, it is notable that Judge Shepherd has softened his tone, if not his position, as Mr Kavanaugh awaits a near-certain near-party-line vote later this month to earn a lifetime appointment as a Supreme Court justice. With Mr Kavanaugh’s recently uncovered e-mails calling into question whether Roe is “settled law” and his opinion last year saying the government should be able to delay an undocumented teen’s abortion, there is little doubt he will be a safe vote to uphold laws chipping away at abortion access. Judge Shepherd and his colleagues need not insert inflammatory rhetoric into their abortion rulings; the lawyerly tone of Hawley suggests they are quite comfortable with the new array of justices who will eventually sort things out. There’s one potential hitch. Though everyone seems resigned to Mr Kavanaugh’s pending confirmation, the vote won’t be called for a week or two. Republican senators Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski might yet decide that voting for Mr Trump’s second Supreme Court pick would be a move to undermine a constitutional right they claim to support.