TO WIN elections, a certain degree of likeability is indispensable. That was a problem for Rahm Emanuel, who surprised everyone on September 4th by saying he won’t, after all, seek re-election as Chicago’s mayor after two terms in office. It appears that he expected to be humiliated in the election early next year. “Rahmbo”, as he is known, renowned as a tough fighter in his 23 years in politics, thus made an uncharacteristically meek decision to bow out. It was probably the right one. Problems were piling up for the mayor of America’s third-largest city. Mr Emanuel, once chief of staff for President Barack Obama and close to the Clintons, is an abrasive figure with no strong base of local support. He won comfortably in 2011 but then struggled to beat an ill-prepared opponent in a run-off in 2015. In both elections more than half of his support came from wards dominated by black residents. (Chicago is heavily segregated and split roughly evenly between white, black and Latino blocks of voters.) Natalie Moore, who analyses Chicago politics in her book, “The South Side”, suggests Mr Emanuel largely owed his African-American support to his links with Mr Obama. Now that those links have lost their relevance, residents’ dislike of Mr Emanuel, who is perceived as “brusque”, “iron-fisted” and beholden to rich donors and corporate interests, has begun to play a bigger role. That Mr Emanuel earned $18m in a brief career in finance contributed to perceptions of him as an outsider. Voters respected Mr Emanuel as an effective champion of business, who did what he could to fix the city’s dismal finances. But they never really warmed to him. His approval ratings slipped below 25% in the past year, though they have since recovered somewhat thanks to a high-profile spat with Donald Trump, the president. He was blamed for failing to reform rotten public schools and for rising property taxes. Worse is his record on gun violence, in which young, black men are overwhelmingly the victims. He badly mishandled the aftermath of a police killing in 2014 in which a young man, Laquan MacDonald, was shot 16 times. When police belatedly released footage of the incident, it looked disturbingly like a summary execution, resulting in angry protests. Had the video been released before the 2015 election Mr Emanuel would almost certainly have lost.  Some speculate that the trial of the policeman accused of the killing, which is set to begin on September 5th, will produce testimony that is awkward for the mayor. Even if it doesn’t, perceptions of gun violence remain resolutely grim. “There was no way he was going to get the majority of the black vote again” says Dick Simpson, a professor at the University of Illinois in Chicago. Mr Emanuel will see out his term until next May. Mayoral candidates will face a non-party primary election in February, which Democrats will dominate, possibly followed by a run-off election in April. The race could give a hint whether more left-leaning candidates are ascendant in the party. Lori Lightfoot, a gay, African-American woman who has scrutinised police violence in the city, is one such candidate. Mr Emanuel’s pragmatic centrism may have looked increasingly unexciting for many Democratic voters in the current political climate. That could bode ill for another possible successor, Paul Vallas, a softly-spoken white man with a record of school reform.