IN THE pantheon of Russian intelligence, the KGB is king. It fills the ranks of cinematic and literary villains, from John Le Carré’s spymaster Karla to the sleeper agents of “The Americans”, a TV show. But a different set of spies is now hogging the limelight. The GRU, the intelligence arm of Russia’s armed forces, has been caught up in almost all the crises involving the country in recent years, from the annexation of Crimea, to the downing of a passenger aircraft over Ukraine, to the attempted murder of Sergei Skripal, a former spy, in Salisbury. Who are these hyperactive military spooks? The Bolsheviks created a military intelligence service in the earliest days of the Soviet Union, settling on the name GRU (from the Russian for “Main Intelligence Directorate”) in 1942. While the agency that became the KGB (“Committee for State Security”) was housed in striking headquarters close to the foreign ministry, earning the label “near neighbours”, the GRU became the “distant neighbours”, exiled to a small, shabby house much further away. Yet by the end of the second world war, it had penetrated Britain’s atom-bomb programme and over 70 American institutions. During the cold war, it cropped up at key moments. It was a GRU officer who formed a backchannel with Robert Kennedy, the president’s brother and America’s attorney-general, during the Cuban missile crisis. Another was at the heart of Britain’s Profumo scandal a year later. The KGB, now split into the security-focused FSB and outward-looking SVR, had the fame. But the GRU could boast of closer ties to revolutionary movements and terrorist groups, greater experience with weapons and explosives, and even tougher training for recruits. A book published in 1986 by Vladimir Rezun, a GRU defector, described a film shown to new spooks; it depicted a traitorous officer, lashed to a stretcher, being fed into a crematorium alive. Competition between the services was intense. When the KGB learnt of an audacious British operation to tap Soviet communications by digging a tunnel into East Berlin, it did not bother to tell the GRU that 25 of its telephone lines had been compromised for over a year. The rivalry was so fierce, writes Jonathan Haslam, a historian, “that operatives of the one were not even entirely safe from the protégés of the other”. The GRU was starved of funds and slashed in size after Russia’s war with Georgia in 2008, when it failed to detect that Georgia had got hold of new anti-aircraft missiles. But its special forces subsequently played a pivotal role in seizing Crimea and supporting pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine in 2014. GRU hackers, dubbed “Fancy Bear”, ran riot in cyberspace, penetrating everything from Germany’s parliament to Emmanuel Macron’s campaign for the French presidency. But some of these activities proved embarrassing. In May, Bellingcat, an investigative website, unmasked the name of a GRU officer involved in the downing of a Malaysian Airlines flight over Ukraine; the hapless spy had sent online shopping to the address of the GRU headquarters. Two months later, Robert Mueller, America’s special counsel, exposed the names, ranks and addresses of a dozen GRU hackers. Such occasional missteps may not deter an organisation whose ethos is to take risks, but it has other reasons for worry. In recent years, it is thought to have suffered from heavy defections. Mass expulsions have decimated the ranks of Russian spies under diplomatic cover in the West, making operations harder. And Britain has hinted at cyber-attacks on GRU communications and finances. The time may have come for James Bond to take on a GRU villain in the franchise’s next film. Dig deeperBritain identifies two Russians as suspects in the Skripal poisoning (Sep 6th 2018)