WE LIVE in a golden age of dissent. Not since 1968 has the Western world been as roiled by street protests—women’s marches, anti-Trump demonstrations and alt-right parades in America, anti-Brexit marches in Britain, to say nothing of strikes in continental Europe—as in recent years. The loosening of libel and other laws over the past half-century has made it safer to express unpopular or dangerous views, and social media have made it easier than ever to spread them. And that is just among the public. There is plenty of dissent in the corridors of power, too: Donald Trump barely has the confidence of his own staff, let alone a majority of American voters. The British government is only ever one ex-cabinet minister’s column away from collapsing. Rickety coalitions hold up the orthodoxy in places where it has not already fallen. It is, therefore, an apposite time for the British Museum to make a big show of the subject. Titled “I object: Ian Hislop’s search for dissent”, the exhibition, which opens on September 6th, has been co-curated by Mr Hislop (pictured, below), a fixture on BBC panel shows and editor of Private Eye, a British satirical magazine. “Who decides what is ‘history’?” asks the flyer for the show. “Traditionally the answer is ‘the winners’. But we’re setting out to investigate what the other people had to say—the downtrodden, the forgotten, the protestors. They left their marks on objects, and these objects can be found in the museum”. In short, Mr Hislop and Tom Hockenhull, his co-curator, scoured the British Museum’s collection to find things subversive. It is a clever conceit. Unfortunately, it does not work. By limiting themselves to one museum’s resources, Mr Hislop and Mr Hockenhull produce an incoherent a grab-bag of 180 items that are linked together thanks only to the heroic efforts of the show’s blurb writers. An artefact showing Mahatma Gandhi spinning cotton at his wheel as part of a national effort to hit the British textile industry—and with it colonial rule—would seem, at first glance, to have little in common with an ancient Egyptian artist drawing copulating figures on a tablet. Indeed, also at second, third and all others glances after that. Is the saucy tablet a show of disrespect towards a pharaoh or simply a bored artisan with an active imagination? How does it strike at the heart of imperial power? The shows notes are unhelpful on this front and Mr Hislop’s comments, presented in speech bubbles, lower rather than raise the tone. Had the summer holidays not ended, it would have been easy to assume this is an exhibition aimed at drawing in a younger audience. That a handful of defaced coins (with inscriptions ranging from “hang the pope” to “votes for women” to, inevitably, “end the BBC monopoly”), zippo lighters engraved by American troops in Vietnam (“Let me win your heart and mind or I’ll burn your god damn hut down”) and a keffiyeh to represent Yasser Arafat is the best Messrs Hislop and Hockenhull could dredge up from the stacks is perhaps cause to worry about the British Museum’s famous and famously voluminous collection. More likely it is simply a reflection of the impossible task the curators set themselves. The best part of the show can be found just before the exit. In an effort to encourage audience participation, the museum has left pencils and slips of paper for visitors to jot down their own acts of quiet subversion. The first few are delightfully petty, and quintessentially English. “I sit in first class with a standard class ticket,” writes one anonymous contributor. “Do not walk on the grass. Yes, I did!” writes another unknown soul. “Ran through a wheat field,” confesses one “T. May”. It is a shame. “I object” features a big-name (in Britain at least) guest curator, an associated book and a tie-in series on BBC Radio. After all that, the British Museum is unlikely to return to the subject of dissent for several years. Yet the exhibition it has put on, which done differently could have shone a light on or drawn parallels to past struggles, is an underwhelming, middlebrow affair.