IN AUSTRALIA, Pentecostal preachers are rejoicing over the emergence of one of their followers as head of government, and urging people to pray that he will prevail in the next general election. Scott Morrison was chosen as prime minister on August 24th after an internal power struggle within the ruling Liberal Party. He’s a devout member of the Horizon Pentecostal church in Sydney, which offers passionate preaching and singing and the experience of speaking in strange tongues which marks out charismatic Christianity. This is the latest example of a paradoxical fact about political life in English-speaking democracies. Electorates are growing ever more secular and liberal in their attitude to touchstone ethical issues. Yet in the early 21st century, just as in the 20th, individuals who are either very religious or at least from religious backgrounds have often reached the highest echelons. Australia’s recent prime ministers have included Tony Abbott who once trained for the priesthood, and Kevin Rudd who was of Catholic background but became a keen Anglican. This runs counter to the trend in the country as a whole: the 2016 census showed the number of Australians professing no religion had risen in a decade from 19% to 30% while those who identified as Christians had fallen from 64% to 52%. One recent prime minister was more typical of her time: Julia Gillard, a professed atheist. In years past, by contrast, it could be argued that Australia’s leaders were more secular than the nation. One study pointed out that among nine prime ministers who held office from 1949 to 1991, none was a seriously observant Christian. Now it is the political class that seems disproportionately faithful. A similar secularising trend is at work in Canadian society where those of no religion amounted to 24% of the population in 2011, up from 16.5% a decade earlier while self-described Christians fell from 77% to 67%. Yet that did not prevent a devoutly religious politician, Stephen Harper, holding office as prime minister from 2006 to 2015. He is a member of the Christian and Missionary Alliance church, a body which stresses the imminence of the apocalypse. It is very possible that dislike of his evangelical style influenced some of the voters who eventually turfed him out in favour of Justin Trudeau’s Liberals. But plainly, strongly held religious belief is not a political killer; far more people were and still are prepared to vote for his Conservatives than share his metaphysical ideas. In the even more secular environment of Britain, the prime minister Theresa May is a clergyman‘s daughter and a churchgoer herself. Recent predecessors have included Gordon Brown, a Presbyterian minister’s son, and the zealously if erratically religious Tony Blair. But it has been observed that Mrs May is more comfortable discussing her father’s religion than her own; and even when she talks about her father, she stresses that he served the whole community not just fellow Christians. That is probably because she senses that in Britain, as in many other democracies today, voters are averse to overt or exclusive-sounding displays of piety. Mr Blair’s advisers were often embarrassed by his occasional professions of faith. In part because they know they are representing a minority style, intensely religious individuals in positions of power have often been rather cautious about exercising that power. Mr Harper did not attempt to overturn same-sex marriage, which had been legalised shortly before he took office; nor did he reverse Canada’s liberal abortion regime. One of the main results of his religious belief was a strongly pro-Israel foreign policy. In Australia colleagues of Mr Morrison have likewise been stressing that he has no intention of turning the country into a theocracy. He abstained during the recent parliamentary vote which allowed same-sex marriage, a change that was overwhelmingly supported in a plebiscite. But his convictions will be put to the test during forthcoming debates over euthanasia (which will soon become legal in the state of Victoria) and abortion, which may soon be decriminalised in Queensland. In general, both the former Canadian prime minister and the current Australian one have found themselves at the helm of parties with a broad spectrum of opinion over sensitive ethical questions. As politicians, they have had to show understanding of that spectrum. All this raises the question of whether America is an outlier. In other Anglophone democracies, politicians often have to play down their religiosity. In America’s White House there is an incumbent who is anything but religious; but Donald Trump finds it expedient to cultivate the evangelical Christians who are his most loyal constituency. In fact, the American electorate is gradually secularising over time. It remains the case that a substantial proportion of Americans would baulk at voting for an atheist candidate, even one whose general credentials were good. But the share is falling. A study last year found that 32% of all American would be “less likely” to vote for an atheist (an equal number felt a similar aversion to Islam) but only 20% of younger voters (aged 18-29) held that anti-atheist view. So it seems conceivable that future incumbents of the White House, even Republican ones, will no longer be so constrained to court the faithful, regardless of their own feelings, or give a pious impression of themselves. One interesting possibility is that the high incidence of religiously influenced people in the upper echelons of politics may not have all that much to do with the content of their beliefs or the policies they yearn to implement. Consider this: whatever the beliefs being professed, religion provides its followers with an environment in which they learn to regulate their lives, organise the activities of others, marshal arguments and communicate passion. These are all skills that come into play in the political arena. And perhaps this factor accounts for the large number of people in politics who were moulded by religious worlds, even if they later move away. One possible example is New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinta Ardern, who was brought up as a practising Mormon, and kept that faith through her twenties, until she came to dislike the religion’s teaching on homosexuality.