MORE than 1,500 people entered The Economist’s essay competition—including several who disclosed that they wished to enter even though they were ineligible to win because they were under the age of 16. (The competition was open to those 16 to 25 years old.) Though the quality was extremely high across the board, sadly only one essay in each of the five Open Future categories could win. We are pleased to announce them. Open Borders: Does immigration strengthen or undermine tolerance? Denzel Chung, age 18, originally from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, moved to New Zealand in 2010 and is in his first year at the University of Otago in health sciences. Open Ideas: What should a commitment to free speech on campus entail? Katherine Krem, age 23, originally from Sofia, Bulgaria now lives in San Francisco and recently graduated from Stanford University, where she completed a BS in Mathematical and Computational Science and an MA in Communication. Open Markets: What is the best way to improve competition in modern capitalism? Charlotte Grace, age 23, lives in Cambridge in Britain and is starting graduate studies in economics at Nuffield College, Oxford, focussing on competition policy. Open Progress: Do the benefits of artificial intelligence outweigh the risks? Frank L. Ruta, age 24, from New York is a PhD student in applied physics and applied mathematics at Columbia University. Open Society: Has political correctness gone too far? Julia Symons, age 25, from Australia, is an MSc student in global health at the London School of Economics. Video competition winners The Economist Films organised a video competition for Open Future called, “A minute to change the world.” People of any age were invited to submit a 60-second video proposing one thing they would change to build a more open world and how they would go about it. More than 200 entries from 52 countries were received.  A panel of judges including journalists from The Economist and Amber Heard, an actor and activist, picked the winners based on five criteria: originality, potential impact of idea and its implementation, presentation of argument and the use of evidence to support the argument. The two winners are: Su Shien Ng, age 18, from Malaysia: recently completed her A-levels.  Vinithra Sudhakar, age 17, from America: a high school student in North Carolina.  The essay competition shortlisted finalists by category: Open Borders: Keenan Ashbrook (20, America), Rebecca Scurlock (19, America), Joel Nee (20, Singapore), Juan Carlos Gabaldon (24, Venezuela). Open Ideas: Adil Hakeem (25, Singapore), Charles Dawson (21, America), Juliana Hayden-Nygren (23, Canada), Jefferson Keith Sinclair III (25, America). Open Markets: James Wilson (25, Australia), Adrien Book (25, France), Avital Balwit (20, America), Rigvedang Saini (17, Singapore). Open Progress: Jay Reynolds (24, America), Danny Sawyer (25, America), Jasmine Gan (20, Australia), Roxanne Heston (23, America). Open Society: Lusha Jetley (17, India), Madeline Grant (25, Britain), Kiara van Hout (19, Australia), Luiza M. Leão (23, Brazil). We thank our judges for their work in reviewing the essays: Open Borders: Liz Collett of Migration Policy Institute; Riem Spielhaus of the University of Göttingen; Emma Hogan, correspondent; Lena Schipper, Seoul bureau chief; Emma Duncan, social policy editor. Open Ideas: Robert Shibley of the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education; Ilya Shapiro of the Cato Institute; Idrees Kahloon, US policy correspondent; Jon Fasman, Washington correspondent; Robert Guest, foreign editor. Open Markets: Chad Bown of the Peterson Institute for International Economics; Victoria Bateman of the University of Cambridge; Callum Williams, Britain economics correspondent; Ali Digby, assistant editor, Open Future; Charlie Wells, deputy snapchat editor. Open Progress: Tabitha Goldstaub of CognitionX; Priya Lakhani of Century Tech; Kenneth Cukier, senior editor; Alexandra Suich Bass, US technology editor; Hal Hodson, technology correspondent. Open Society: Faisal Devji of the University of Oxford; External judge requesting anonymity; Sacha Nauta, public policy editor; Ana Lankes, assistant news editor; Helen Joyce, finance editor. We also thank Turnitin for its assistance in the final review process to confirm originality of the submissions. Yet the majority of the thanks must go to all the people who entered the essay and video competitions: the very act of contributing put these important issues onto the public agenda, where they deserve to be. Thank you.