DOLNA KRUPA seems an unlikely place for a controversy about Russian influence in Europe. The nondescript Slovak village has only 2,000 residents. But a mysterious camouflaged compound just outside it, protected by high walls, barbed wire and a giant dog, has many in Slovakia worried. In June Russian state media announced that the site, a former pig farm, was the “European headquarters” of the Night Wolves, a motorcycle club of Russian origins, with whom Vladimir Putin once rode. The group is banned in Poland on security grounds and subject to American sanctions for members’ involvement in the annexation of Crimea and the war in eastern Ukraine. Slovak liberals were therefore alarmed to learn that the bikers had established a base in their country. The outcry grew louder when reports emerged that the Slovak Recruits, a right-wing paramilitary group, had conducted training exercises at the site using old tanks. The site’s owner, Jozef Hambalek, is a well-connected businessman with an enthusiasm for motorcycles and nationalism. He acquired the equipment on loan from the defence ministry, claiming it was for a museum. More than 200 intellectuals, politicians and activists have signed a letter calling on authorities to close the base and expel the Night Wolves. The country’s president, Andrej Kiska, chastised authorities for not doing enough, warning that “these are no ordinary motorcycle enthusiasts.” Some liken the Night Wolves’ presence to the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia (of which Slovakia was once part) 50 years ago. “We did not invite you here in 1968, we do not want you even in 2018,” reads a billboard in the nearby town of Trnava. In Dolna Krupa, a group of activists is trying to force out the Night Wolves, urging authorities to enforce regulations requiring that Mr Hambalek’s land should be used only for agriculture. There are suspicions that the centre-right Smer party, which heads the country’s ruling coalition, is dragging its feet. Grigorij Meseznikov of the Institute for Public Affairs, a think-tank, says that, although the party is officially pro-Western, many members are sympathetic towards Russia. The government has said it is monitoring the Night Wolves and the Slovak Recruits, but cannot yet act against them because they have committed no crime. But more recently it has started to take action. The defence ministry has asked for its equipment back, and the economy ministry has fined Mr Hambalek €33,000 ($38,000) for failing to tell them about the military vehicles that he was storing at the compound. The Night Wolves and the Slovak Recruits, which says that membership applications have grown since the controversy, are part of a growing constellation of far-right groups in Slovakia. Foremost among them is “Kotleba—People’s Party Our Slovakia”, led by Marian Kotleba, a man who used to dress like the Nazi-affiliated Slovak militiamen of the 1940s and who plans to run for president next year. The party has 14 seats in the 150-seat parliament, and has polled at around 10% over the summer. Experts say that these groups have been boosted by anti-EU and anti-immigrant sentiment. Many hope that after the Night Wolves controversy, authorities will keep a closer eye on their activities.