THERE is a whole constellation of films entitled “A Star Is Born”. The first, released in 1937, was a tragic romance featuring Janet Gaynor and Fredric March as two Hollywood actors. Then came the 1954 version, with Judy Garland and James Mason, which was about an actor and a singer who becomes a movie star. The 1976 version, with Barbra Streisand and Kris Kristofferson, was about a beardy stadium rocker and a nightclub crooner who becomes a pop star. And now we have “A Star Is Born”: Volume Four, which was first screened in Venice. It tells the story of a…well, a beardy stadium rocker and a nightclub crooner who becomes a pop star, just as its most recent predecessor did. As unoriginal as it may be, the film is bound to be an award-winning smash, because it boasts a likeable, natural performance from Lady Gaga, one of pop music’s most talented provocateurs. Who else could turn stomachs by wearing a dress made out of raw meat at the MTV Awards, and then break hearts by trilling “Edelweiss” at the Oscars? As well as giving Ms Gaga her first lead role, the film is the directorial debut of Bradley Cooper, star of “The Hangover” and “Silver Linings Playbook”, who choreographs proceedings with such bullish energy and intimacy that the camera almost bumps into the actors. He also plays Jackson Maine, a guitar-toting rock’n’roller who is an idol to millions but a slave to pills and booze. Ms Gaga plays a waitress named Ally. (What a shame, incidentally, that she isn’t called Esther Blodgett, as the character was in the first two versions of “A Star Is Born”.) After Jackson is spellbound by her singing in a small club one night, he pushes her up towards fame and fortune while he spirals down into alcoholic oblivion. The biggest surprise in this sincere but hokey melodrama is how little Mr Cooper does to update the scenario. When Jackson and Ally have a night on the town together, she is annoyed by two people who try to take his picture—in fact, she punches one of them in the face, which seems a tad excessive. The next night, when he invites her on stage with him, their duet goes viral on YouTube. But aside from these two references to smartphones and the internet, the film could be set in the same year as the version starring Ms Streisand. Indeed, it isn’t the YouTube video which lights the blue touch paper under Ally’s solo career, but a British manager (Ravi Gavron) who approaches her at one of Jackson’s concerts and waves a contract in her face, like every villainous Svengali since 1937, if not before. A one-dimensional smoothie, he instructs her to dye her hair and employ a troupe of back-up dancers for an appearance on “Saturday Night Live”. Again, he could have barked the same instructions several decades ago. These days, pop wannabes also have to nurture their social-media followings, team up with rappers, clock in as guest judges on “The Voice”, tout their own perfume brands and manufacture feuds with their supposed rivals. Ally does none of that. Perhaps Mr Cooper just wasn’t interested in the machinations of the contemporary pop business. After Ally meets the diabolical manager, the film becomes a sort of montage of the steps she takes from recording a demo to triumphing as an arena-filling, Grammy-nominated celebrity, but it doesn’t stop to examine what she is doing or whether she wants to do it. It is strange that a film called “A Star Is Born” should be so offhand about just how a star is born. But Mr Cooper has said that he wasn’t inspired by his co-star so much as by his friends in Metallica, the heavy metal band, and by Mr Kristofferson’s turn in 1976. Ms Gaga’s presence notwithstanding, “A Star Is Born” portrays the music industry as it is experienced by middle-aged men who joined it in the 20th century, rather than by a young woman who joined it in the 21st.