FEW displays in Washington, DC political theatre tax a viewer’s patience like a confirmation hearing for a Supreme Court nominee. The first day of hearings is particularly heavy-going: 21 members of the Senate Judiciary Committee take turns holding forth on law, justice and the American way while the nominee sits in silent repose. The nominee faces and listens to these friendly and hostile senators for hours, refraining from smilingly nodding along or furrowing his brow. This judicious restraint gives way later in the day to a few “introducers”—famous people who love the nominee and want to tell the world why. Then the Supreme Court hopeful himself gets a quarter of an hour to make an opening statement filled with platitudes about the law and plaudits for his adorable family. All that happened on September 4th when Brett Kavanaugh, Donald Trump’s second Supreme Court pick in as many years, began his stint before the Senate. But the torpor of the typical opening-day hearing was broken moments after Senator Chuck Grassley, chair of Judiciary Committee, began the hearing. A recent addition to the committee, Senator Kamala Harris of California, calmly implored Mr Grassley “to be recognised for a question before we proceed”. The senior senator from Iowa went on talking, and Ms Harris raised her voice. “The committee received just last night, less than 15 hours ago, 42,000 pages of documents that we have not had an opportunity to review or read or analyse” related to the nomination. “You are out of order, I’ll proceed”, Mr Grassley said, banging his gavel. “We cannot possibly move forward, Mr chairman”, she replied. When the chairman did move forward, other Democrats from the committee echoed Ms Harris's call. Mr Grassley pressed on, ignoring the appeals. Richard Blumenthal, a Democratic senator, then moved to adjourn the proceedings, spurring protestors in the audience to cheer and clap, drowning out the chair’s voice. Mr Blumenthal called the hearing a “charade and a mockery of our norms”, and a voice from the back of the chamber added, “a mockery and a travesty of justice”. Whoops and screams continued for some moments, prompting Mr Kavanaugh’s wife to reassure their young daughters. Then Cory Booker, a Democratic senator, added his two cents: “What is the rush? What are we trying to hide by not having the documents out front?” This was a new challenge for the 84-year-old senator, and Mr Grassley accused Mr Booker of taking advantage of his “decency and integrity”. The pandemonium continued for nearly half an hour. The Democrats have a legitimate grievance. While Mr Kavanaugh’s 307 judicial opinions as a judge on the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals are available, many documents stemming from his work in the executive branch have not come to light. Last month, the National Archives told the Senate it needed at least until the end of October to review 900,000 pages of documents related to Mr Kavanaugh’s work as a lawyer in the White House of George W. Bush. Senate leaders nevertheless indicated they would begin hearings for Mr Kavanaugh in early September, hoping to seat him in Justice Anthony Kennedy’s old chair by October 1st, when the Supreme Court hears its first arguments of the new term. And last week, the Trump administration asserted a claim of executive privilege to withhold 100,000 documents from Mr Kavanaugh’s work in the early 2000s. But on the evening of September 3rd, hours before the hearing, William Burck, a lawyer for Mr Bush, sent the committee 42,000 pages of records. Democrats complained that one evening isn’t quite enough to survey that much paper, but the Senate’s Republicans seemed to have no such problem. The Republican side of the aisle had “completed its review of each and every one of these pages” overnight, a press officer insisted. That is far-fetched, to say the least. But it’s also implausible, given the level of scepticism Democrats on the committee voiced about the merits of Mr Kavanaugh’s nomination, that time to survey additional documents would make a difference in their votes. Every Democrat on the committee seems poised to vote against moving this nomination to the floor, and their opposition is already overdetermined: they object to Mr Kavanaugh's record of voting against environmentalists and for expanded gun rights; they fear his misgivings about abortion rights and his hearty embrace of presidential power. So why are Democrats staging an unprecedented campaign to mess with Mr Kavanaugh’s confirmation hearing? With the Republicans holding on to a slim majority in the Senate, chances are near zero that the orchestrated attempt to adjourn the proceedings will deny Mr Kavanaugh his Supreme Court seat or delay his investiture long enough to keep him unrobed for the beginning of the upcoming term. But the Democrats have apparently decided they aren’t going down this time without a fight, even if, as star Supreme Court lawyer Lisa Blatt told senators on Tuesday, he's the best nominee liberals could ever hope to see from a Republican president. The reasonable beef they have with the Senate’s rush—particularly after purely partisan motives led Republicans to stall for over a year to confirm Justice Antonin Scalia’s replacement, stealing a seat from Barack Obama—deserves to be aired.