CAMPAIGNERS for gay rights have enjoyed a sequence of victories in the West. The battleground has often been gay marriage, which is now recognised in nearly 30 countries. But in India, the world's largest democracy, the situation has been very different. Homosexuality itself was regarded as a crime there, albeit one that was rarely prosecuted. Untold millions of Indians were designated as felons, by a series of judicial rulings issued as recently as 2013. Then on September 6th being gay was decriminalised. What happened? Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code was to blame for the predicament. A holdover from colonial times, the 19th-century law forbade “carnal intercourse against the order of nature with any man, woman or animal”. That language could be, and still is, read to prohibit bestiality and incest. But it was also held to refer to gay sex, as well as oral and anal sex practised by heterosexual couples. The threat of punishment was held over the head of every gay person living in India, by anyone who might wish to harass or extort them, and used to drive their civic organisations underground. Section 377 was not challenged in the courts until the 1990s. It idled in the judicial doldrums until matters took a hopeful turn in 2009, when the Delhi High Court ruled that it could not be used to ban consensual relations between adults, without being unconstitutionally discriminatory. But in 2013 that hope was quashed by a Supreme Court ruling that stood out for its shoddy writing and reasoning. Proceeding from the supposition that people engaging in the proscribed sex acts were members of a “miniscule [sic] minority”, the highest court upheld the ban on the grounds that only the legislature had the right to say whether they could be treated as a criminal class. In India’s parliament, alas, there was only the thinnest of support for gay rights. So the path to decriminalisation led back through the courts. In legal terms the way was simple enough. The language of Section 377 had to be reinterpreted such that “the order of nature” could admit a greater variety of sex. The rest of 377 could be, and was, left to stand. First the case had to be referred to a larger bench of the Supreme Court than the one that issued the ruling in 2013, in light of relatively liberal judgments reached since then, such as those recognising the rights of transgender Indians, and a general right to privacy. Then there was the matter of gathering together a bunch of eloquent plaintiffs. That seems to have gone most of the way towards demonstrating to five of the Supreme Court’s senior justices that sexual orientation was an unfair basis on which to discriminate among citizens. All that was left was for the judges to take turns extolling the principle of justice for all and lamenting the injustice that had been done to gay Indians for so many years. The judges’ statements were largely unopposed in the political realm this time round. The conservative government of Narendra Modi had withdrawn its stand against the reinterpretation in July. Nearly everyone writing about the case started by mentioning the penal code’s British origin, one sure way to unite right and left in a post-colonial society. Some members of the Supreme Court might have wished to burnish their liberal credentials, before turning to more contentious matters like the government’s brief to expand its troubled universal-identification system, or to allow a Hindu group to build a temple on the site of a razed mosque. Regardless of the larger context in India, and however symbolic the gesture, there is much to celebrate in the outcome. Popular attitudes towards sexual minorities have changed rapidly in the West. As recently as 2004, an American presidential campaign could be successfully run on opposition to gay marriage. Legal victories led the way there, and may yet hasten fuller expressions of equality in India as well.