MUSIC FESTIVALS, once the domain of the eccentric, fanatical and unwashed, are now a multibillion-dollar global industry. eFestivals, a listing website, counts more than 700 taking place this year in Britain alone, encompassing urban day-to-night events as well as out-of-town weekenders. In spite of this diversity, the unequivocal leader of the pack remains Glastonbury, which will celebrate its half-century in 2020. It is by far the biggest in terms of size: over 85 stages are dotted across 900 acres of Somerset land, covering most musical niches. Between punters, performers and volunteers, combined footfall reaches around 200,000 people, temporarily outranking Middlesbrough and Norwich in terms of population size. Few other events in the British cultural calendar loom so large, either. Appearances from superstars such as the Rolling Stones, U2 and Adele make national news. The announcement of Jay-Z’s headline performance in 2008 prompted a nasty debate about the appropriate place for hip-hop (a complaint that looks decidedly quaint today, with British rappers such as Wiley receiving honours from the queen). The following year it was a hero’s welcome received at Glastonbury, rather than two homecoming nights in Hyde Park in London, that brought Damon Albarn, Blur’s frontman, to tears. All this makes the years where Glastonbury does not take place a rare chance for others to fill the gap (it opts for a break roughly twice per decade, to let the farmland recover, or to reinforce infrastructure). This year was one of those—and it showcased the rickety state of the competition, and of the industry at large. At their peak in the 2000s T In The Park, Reading and Leeds, all weekend events, and V Festival challenged Glastonbury’s dominance in national broadcast media and weakened its ability to attract exclusive performances. All have waned. V and T In The Park relocated and rebranded as the scaled-down RiZE and TRNSMT respectively. Reading and Leeds remain a popular rite of passage for teenage renegades, but were widely mocked for their line-ups this year, particularly the prominence of Kings of Leon. When the band earned its first British headline slot at Glastonbury in 2008, it was an affirmation of their impending global stardom. A decade on, times have changed, leaving the Tennessee rockers far behind. They are now about as hip as Bon Jovi. City-based festivals did not fare much better, particularly in London. AEG Live, an events company which controls concerts at the O2 Arena and Hyde Park, created problems. A deal signed with Tower Hamlets council granted it full rights to Victoria Park in Hackney; the company ejected local mainstays Lovebox and Field Day from the grounds and established a soulless facsimile, All Points East, in their place. Resistance from Friends of Brockwell Park, a community body, halted Lovebox’s intended move to Brixton in south London and the event ended up in west London instead. Field Day, which was granted access to Brockwell Park, suffered crowd crushes, meaning that next year it will probably be forced to find a new home for the second summer running. AEG’s primary competitor in America is Live Nation Entertainment, a merger of Live Nation, an entertainment conglomerate, and Ticketmaster, a leading ticket-selling outlet. Whereas British festivals were once exempt from this corporate tussle, Live Nation Entertainment’s acquisition of a majority stake in Festival Republic, a promoter, now gives it a portfolio of 21 British festivals. Those, too, were messy. Two shambolic daytime events in north London at the end of June were beset by bar shortages and security issues, with an estimated 40% of the hired workforce absconding to watch the World Cup. In July Wireless Festival, bedrock of the rap and R’n’B calendar, was criticised for an initial offering of just three female performers. The organisers then waited until the day of closing act DJ Khaled’s performance to inform ticketholders that he had cancelled months before. Festivals are inherently precarious and so the lure of a transnational company with deep pockets to shore up the risk is understandable. But it means that originality is being stymied. The murmurs of disapproval that greeted many of 2018’s musical bills reflect an imbalance between consumer demand for inventive programming and a paucity of ideas supplied from the top. Liam Gallagher, an artist whose best days were in the early 1990s, headlined five festivals. Those were all funded by Live Nation. Highlights of Glastonburys past—rejuvenating the career of a washed-up Johnny Cash in 1994, or inviting the Orchestra of Syrian Musicians to open proceedings in 2016 in the wake of the Brexit referendum—gave festival-goers intriguing incentives to part with their money. The diverse programme and extensive media coverage adds a patina of prestige to those that make the often-long trip to perform at Worthy Farm. The millions of pounds in charitable donations made by the founding Eavis family are in keeping with the original alternative values of festival culture, proving that size does not preclude spirit. It is unlikely that the festival market will ever dry up, but this summer highlighted how many in the field are badly stuck in the mud.