THE 1960s were blessed with a batch of extraordinary songwriters. Half a century on, few are still producing any original material of note. Chief among them are the two 76-year-old Pauls: McCartney and Simon, both of whom released new albums on September 7th. Most of their recent output has been critically acclaimed. In its review of “Egypt Station”, Mr McCartney’s latest record, Rolling Stone marvelled at his capacity to keep “adding new gems to his songbook”. Praise for “In the Blue Light”, Mr Simon’s album, has been more muted—largely because it consists of rearrangements of lesser-known old songs. But “Stranger to Stranger”, an original album he produced in 2016, was a hit. The Guardian, in a five-star review, claimed it was “as rewarding as anything he’s done”. Review data for the two septuagenarians prove that great songwriters do not suddenly lose their ability to craft memorable tunes and lyrics. Since 2000 Mr Simon’s albums have had an average rating of 3.9 stars out of 5, just a hair lower than the score for his previous solo records. Mr McCartney’s average in the 21st century has been 3.5—not as stellar, but considerably better than the 2.9 stars he managed beforehand. Critics generally panned albums by Wings, Mr McCartney’s post-Beatles band, many of which were dominated by whimsical soft-rock fluff. But if his early solo output seemed like an unsatisfying change in direction from the Fab Four, “Egypt Station” feels less so, thanks to its deliberately Beatles-esque feel. Mr McCartney says that the loose concept, of a train passing from place to place, “reminded me of the ‘album’ albums we used to make”. Fans of his mellow, introspective compositions from the late 1960s will be pleased. At least five of the new songs could have been pinched from bootlegged sessions for “The White Album” or “Abbey Road”, with the author musing on an acoustic guitar or piano. The best is “I Don’t Know”, which sounds like a companion to “Let It Be”, albeit no longer with mother Mary’s solace: “Well, I see trouble at every turn / I’ve got so many lessons to learn / What am I doing wrong, I don’t know.” Where Mr McCartney has embellished these songs, it is usually by overdubbing his voice and adding a harpsichord or strings, to accentuate the Beatles flavour. Two closing tracks are meant to be Wings-era episodic numbers, echoing “Band on the Run” and “Live and Let Die”. The low point is the dance-themed “Fuh You”, which feels like seeing your grandpa in a nightclub, yelling: “I just wanna fuh you, I just wanna fuh you”. But those excesses are worth tolerating for tender songs like “Do It Now”, a favourite phrase of Mr McCartney’s long-dead father, who encourages him to seize the day: “Do it now / While the feeling is here / If you leave it too late / It could all disappear.” Mr Simon is a completely different type of songwriter. Whereas Mr McCartney’s lyrics can sound like childlike ditties, Mr Simon’s often resemble free-form poems set to music. “America”, the best that he penned while working with Art Garfunkel, narrates a couple’s road-trip without a single rhyme. The song’s desperate night-time loneliness—“Cathy, I'm lost, I said though I knew she was sleeping / I’m empty and aching and I don’t know why”—is Mr Simon’s default setting. Even his most upbeat solo hits, like “You Can Call Me Al”, are really songs of abandonment. “My nights are so long,” he laments, recalling days on the road. “Where’s my wife and family? What if I die here?” His new album is firmly in that tradition. Its title comes from the opening of “How the Heart Approaches What It Yearns”, in which a man sits “in the blue light of the Belvedere Motel / Wondering as the television burns”. The most fleshed-out of the album’s sombre subjects is the weary husband in “Darling Lorraine”, whose resentment disappears when his wife becomes ill. He too ends up heartbroken in the dark: “Here’s an extra blanket honey, to wrap around your feet / All the trees were washed with April rain / And the moon in the meadow took darling Lorraine.” The novelty that Mr Simon adds to these songs, most of which have been rehashed from his later albums, is the instrumental backing of yMusic, a classical sextet. Unfortunately the best of these arrangements, an orchestral treatment of “The Sound of Silence” (yet another lyric about nocturnal solitude) has only appeared at concerts. When listening to Mr Simon’s entire catalogue, it seems his best songs are backed by other singers: either the South African artists on “Graceland” or Mr Garfunkel’s angelic voice. Mr Simon’s later output has been interesting, but rarely as melodic as his work with Mr Garfunkel. The same is true for Mr McCartney, whose catchy tunes benefited from John Lennon’s acerbic contributions. Unfortunately, the squabbling between both of these 1960s duos ended any chance of later collaborations. Critics might still rate the solo albums highly, but for ordinary fans the appeal has dwindled. Few casual listeners on Spotify have paid much attention to recent records. Only the die-hards are left.