FOR several weeks this summer, Jeff Landry, Louisiana’s attorney-general, had this question pinned to the top of his Twitter feed: “Does @LouisianaGov support the death penalty?” His challenge was part of a bitter row between Mr Landry, a Republican, and Governor John Bel Edwards (pictured), a Democrat, in a deeply red state. It is ostensibly concerns why Louisiana rarely uses capital punishment. Since 2002, just two of the 72 occupants of the state’s death row have been executed. Mr Edwards tried to give a nuanced answer, saying in a letter released to the media only that he would uphold Louisiana law—which stipulates execution must be by lethal injection. Louisiana is one of many states that have been unable to obtain the necessary drugs in recent years. Mr Landry responded by saying that if the drugs were not available, why not use the gallows, the electric chair, the gas chamber, or the firing squad? If the exchange was unedifying, Mr Landry succeeded in his wider aim—to put Mr Edwards on the defensive as he prepares to face voters again. The latest row between the two men seemed to serve as the unofficial kick-off of the 2019 race. As he needled the governor, Mr Landry announced that it was time for Republicans to line up behind a single challenger. In the primary of 2015, three well-funded Republican candidates bloodied one another. In the general election, Mr Edwards trounced the most damaged of the three, David Vitter, then a US senator, a major upset in a state that went 60-40 for Donald Trump. Mr Landry says he is willing to stand—“If I run, I’ll win”, he says—but he would rather someone else did. The race for governor in 2019 will be a challenging one for Republicans, despite their natural advantages in the state. While Mr Landry and other Republicans paint Mr Edwards as a leftie, he has in fact governed from the centre. And his military background, his love of hunting and strong pro-life views all help counterbalance his party affiliation. Mr Landry reckons the Republicans who could be counted on to beat Mr Edwards include himself, Senator John Kennedy and Steve Scalise, a congressman and the majority whip. But with the departure of Paul Ryan, Mr Scalise is in line for a promotion to majority leader–and possibly speaker. Asked if he would consider a run if the Republicans lose the House in the mid-terms, Mr Scalise said he would not, but he agreed that the field should be cleared early. Mr Kennedy, who, one recent poll suggests, could beat Mr Edwards, said he was not ready to commit to the race. Republicans should stop worrying that the situation in 2015 would repeat itself, he added. “I believe competition is a moral good.” There are few other Republicans eyeing the race. They include Ralph Abraham, a congressman who represents the rural north-eastern part of the state; Sharon Hewitt, a state senator from the New Orleans suburbs; Stephen Waguespack, a business lobbyist; and Eddie Rispone, a businessman and donor to conservative causes. Other than Mr Scalise, no one is publicly declaring themselves out of the race yet. That means that Mr Landry’s vision of a clear field for a Republican frontrunner—however pragmatic it might be—may never come into focus. For Mr Edwards, this may bring back fond memories of 2015.