EVERYONE grumbles about the injustices of air travel, but most people assume that the inequities are at least grounded in a fair system. Pay for business class (or have your company pay), and you get comfort and free drinks. Go frugal with basic economy and get stuck in a lousy seat without a carry-on bag. But it is not always a proper free market at 35,000 feet. Sometimes, corruption skews the equation. For instance, on Air India, the country’s state-owned flag carrier, who you know can apparently determine where you sit. The airline’s chief executive, Pradeep Singh Kharola, recently felt compelled to admonish his staff to stop upgrading friends and family members for free from economy class to business or first. “It has come to my knowledge that operating crew carry out upgrades to business and first class unofficially during the flight for their friends and relatives,” Mr Kharola wrote on March 13th to his employees, in a letter that was leaked last week to the Hindustan Times, a newspaper. “This is viewed seriously”, he added. “It is reiterated once again that officials/crew members responsible for all such unauthorised upgrades shall face strict disciplinary action.” The airline allows people to pay on board to upgrade to higher classes. But it seems that Air India flight crew, in particular pilots, have given these upgrades to people they know rather than offering them to all passengers. “This has been a very old menace with pilots exercising their authority wrongly,” a former Air India executive director told the paper. It is hardly the only way pilots on Air India have been accused of misusing their authority. Gary Leff, a travel blogger, notes that one pilot delayed a flight for two-and-a-half hours after refusing to fly unless a certain female co-pilot joined him. Another did not show up because he wanted to fly to a different city. A third invented a fuel emergency so he could land faster. These abuses are not unique to Air India. In fact, on the day of the carrier’s invented fuel emergency, pilots on two other Indian airlines allegedly did the same thing. And corruption of various sorts still plagues airlines across the world. In 2016 LATAM, Latin America’s largest airline, paid $22m in fines stemming from a bribery case in Argentina. In February, Sri Lanka ordered a corruption investigation of its national airline, after the carrier cancelled a management deal with Emirates when it allegedly refused to bump regular passengers in order to give seats to relatives of Sri Lanka's then president. The list goes on. Aeroplane manufacturers are even worse than airlines and are a ready source of graft. In 2016, the Brazilian aircraft manufacturer Embraer agreed to a $205m settlement after an American government probe into alleged bribery of officials in India, Saudi Arabia, Mozambique, and the Dominican Republic. In January last year, in a deal with American, British and Brazilian regulators, Rolls-Royce, a British engine-maker, agreed to cough up £671m ($809m) to settle allegations that it had in the past secured sales with bribery. The fine was the largest ever imposed by Britain on a firm for criminal conduct. Most recently Airbus, a big European aircraft manufacturer, has cleared out its executive board over a long-running corruption scandal that could cost it as much as $3bn in fines. The industry has a long history of corruption. In 2006, Boeing was fined $615m for using corruption to win military contracts from the Pentagon. The question is less why there was so much graft in the first place as why it has gone on for so long in aviation, when it has long been dealt with in other industries Air India, which is currently being privatised by the Indian government, seems to be trying to clean up its act. In addition to cracking down on pilots' misbehaviour, the airline appears to have tackled politically motivated business decisions. In 2016 at least two flights were delayed to accommodate politicians who were running late. But since then, the airline has banned a member of parliament, who was accused of assaulting a cabin crew member, from flying with Air India. And it has announced that it will start fining people who cause flights to be delayed, no matter their political connections. Airline corruption is far from gone. But at least in some corners in India it is starting to be recognised as a problem that needs solving.