DONALD TRUMP was characteristically emphatic: “This is very good news for North Korea and the World—big progress! Look forward to our Summit.” The tweet came on April 20th, shortly after North Korean state media reported that their country would close down the Punggye-ri blast site and stop testing missiles. South Korea also welcomed the move, which comes on the eve of a summit planned for April 27th between Kim Jong Un, North Korea’s dictator, and Moon Jae-in, the president of South Korea, with another one scheduled to take place by early June, for Mr Kim and Mr Trump. Spring is definitely in the air. On April 19th Mr Moon said that the North Korean leader was no longer insisting on the withdrawal of American troops from the Korean peninsula as a precondition for giving up his nuclear weapons. Unlike in previous years, Mr Kim has not issued any condemnations of the military drills that America and South Korea have been performing since the beginning of the month. Nor has he commented on the appointment of John Bolton as Mr Trump’s national security adviser: the North used to denounce him as “human scum” and a “bloodsucker”. By the standards of the North’s vituperative propaganda machine, this is as emollient as it gets. Nonetheless, there was nothing in Mr Kim’s statement, as reported by the North Korean media, to suggest that the decision was a step towards relinquishing nuclear weapons. On the contrary, Mr Kim said that his country had “verified the completion of nuclear weapons” and that he would halt the tests because they were no longer necessary. Many analysts have been predicting such a moratorium ever since the North announced late last year that it had successfully completed construction of an intercontinental ballistic missile that could reach America. Mr Kim’s comments are therefore best read as an attempt to reiterate North Korea’s status as a nuclear state (although analysts are still not quite sure that his scientists have perfected all the components of a long-range nuclear missile). The moratorium might spare Mr Trump and Mr Moon further embarrassment, but it does not necessarily improve the security of America and South Korea. It is telling that Japan, which was already well within range of Mr Kim’s existing weapons stockpile before last year’s round of tests, and has long worried about being left out in the cold during the current round of North Korean diplomacy, reacted more cautiously. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe welcomed the announcement, but said it was important that it lead to “complete, verifiable denuclearisation”—to which there is still no clear commitment. Mr Trump has said that he might pull out of the summit if he did not feel it were worth America’s time. But his and Mr Moon’s enthusiastic reaction to Mr Kim’s overtures are ramping up expectations for the meetings. South Korea may be happy with relatively modest results, such as regular talks, a resumption of family reunions and cultural exchanges, and perhaps even a revival of humanitarian aid that does not fall foul of the international sanctions regime against the North. But America’s avowed and only aim is to get Mr Kim to give up his nukes. If Mr Trump goes into his pow-wow expecting a quick win, only to find that the North Korean leader’s friendliness does not stretch that far, the mood may sour alarmingly.