THE most delicate balance in British politics is between those who backed Brexit and those who voted against it. So the resignation on April 29th of Amber Rudd, the home secretary and the most prominent Remainer in the cabinet, threatens to be highly destabilising for Theresa May’s already-wobbly government. Ms Rudd quit after a fortnight of revelations about her department’s treatment of the so-called Windrush generation of Caribbean migrants, who came to Britain between 1948 and 1971. The Home Office’s recent policy of creating a “hostile environment” for illegal migrants has ended up ensnaring legal ones, including Windrush arrivals, many of whom lack the paperwork to prove their citizenship. Thousands are thought to have been denied access to housing, health care or work; some may even have been wrongly deported. The last straw for the home secretary seems to have been her statement to MPs last week that she knew nothing of official targets for immigration removals—a claim that was quickly undermined by leaked correspondence suggesting that in fact both she and the prime minister did. Those leaks may well have been payback from Home Office civil servants, whom Ms Rudd originally tried to blame for the scandal. Mrs May faces a tricky task in choosing a new home secretary. There will be pressure to pick someone from the Remain side of the Brexit debate to replace Ms Rudd, who has been among the most outspoken in the cabinet on questions such as Britain’s potential future membership of a customs union with the EU. The prime minister’s weak position—her Conservative Party lacks a majority in the House of Commons—has limited her ability to manage her cabinet. Past rushuffles have been botched. The prime minister has another problem, too. Although Ms Rudd was in charge at the Home Office when the Windrush scandal blew up, the policy that created the problem was invented by the previous home secretary—Mrs May. She was the one who pushed through the hostile-environment policy in 2014. Within minutes of Ms Rudd’s resignation, Labour MPs were suggesting that she was carrying the can for the real culprit. The government will hope that the home secretary’s departure will bring the Windrush affair to a close. It could yet do just the opposite.