THE Founding Fathers thought that operating a postal service was a crucial responsibility of the federal government. The constitution allows Congress a monopoly on delivering post. Today the United States Postal Service (USPS) is the third-biggest employer in America, behind Walmart and the Defence Department. For most of the country’s history, USPS provided the arteries along which information flowed. Not any more. The number of first-class letters has fallen by almost half from its peak in 2001, as communication has migrated to the internet. About half of what still lands in letterboxes is advertising. USPS’s revenue from its monopoly is down by 35% in real terms since 2008. Seeking a survival strategy, and with online shopping booming, the post office is focusing on delivering parcels. But it has no monopoly in this business, and its network was built for letters. Parcels still comprise less than a third of revenue. Competition from the likes of UPS, FedEx and DHL means that USPS is unlikely ever to make enough money to plug its massive pension and health-care deficits, which together exceed $100bn. With its debt already at the maximum allowed by law, USPS may also struggle to invest enough to compete with nimbler rivals. On April 12th President Donald Trump set up a task force to examine USPS’s finances. His motives are fishy. He dislikes Amazon, whose founder, Jeff Bezos, also owns the Washington Post, a newspaper that is critical of Mr Trump. The president says Amazon is charged too little by the post office for delivery of its goods (a claim that is impossible to assess fully because the contract is private). The task force is made up of administration officials, not independent experts. But if it takes its job seriously, it should recommend privatising USPS and relaxing its monopoly power. One reason such a reform would benefit the public is that Congress is incapable of managing the changes the post office badly needs. In recent years politicians have blocked plans to close obsolete facilities and to end costly Saturday deliveries. Democrats side with unions who say reform is unnecessary. Republicans worry about triggering a public bail-out of pension and health-care liabilities. Politicians have struggled with the most basic tasks, such as filling seats on USPS’s board. European countries have shown that market forces improve postal markets (see article). Every member of the EU allows at least some competition for postal delivery. Competition has spurred innovation and efficiency. Since Germany privatised Deutsche Post in 1995, the firm has expanded massively. Along the way, it has pioneered delivery lockers, at which consumers can pick up packages, and experimented with deliveries to parked cars. Britain privatised Royal Mail in 2013, allowing it to raise capital and evolve free from political meddling. Compare that with America, where private couriers are not even allowed access to the public’s letterboxes. Privatisation would force the government to think rigorously about the regulation of postal markets. There is no contradiction between privatisation and the universal-service obligation, the requirement to deliver to every address in the country for a fixed price. In Europe the two are often combined. German regulators can subsidise deliveries to remote rural areas by any operator, should the market fail to provide a universal service on its own. Whether this actually makes sense is a different matter. Subsidising some deliveries was more defensible when postmen carried armfuls of essential letters. It is harder to justify now that they lug advertising and consumer goods. Broadband, rather than post, seems like the appropriate subject for a debate about universal service. Privatisation would make that conversation unavoidable. Mr Zip, capitalist If Congress has struggled with even minor postal reforms, is there any hope that it could pass a sweeping one? It can take inspiration from how Britain privatised Royal Mail. The government should assume USPS’s legacy pension and health-care deficits, to make it more attractive to investors, and also placate workers by giving them shares in the new company. Republicans would need to accept that the government should not pull the rug out from underneath retirees, and realise that if taxpayers do not foot the bill for their benefits, consumers will have to instead. Democrats would need to concede that the purpose of policy is to benefit the public, not to justify the existence of government jobs and state-owned organisations. Privatisation might not be what Mr Trump intends. But a large dose of the free market is what the post office needs most.