WITH their geographical advantage for connecting flights between far-flung places, there is plenty to keep the airlines of the Gulf countries busy. Yet Bahrain’s skies are nearly empty compared with its neighbours. About 9m passengers used its airport last year, far fewer than the 88m for Dubai, 37m for Qatar and 26m for Abu Dhabi. The difference is striking given that Gulf Air, Bahrain’s flag carrier, was for decades the most prestigious airline in the Middle East. In its heyday in the 1970s and early 1980s, none of its three neighbours even had national airlines. Geopolitics was the driving force behind Gulf Air’s rise and fall. During the 19th century, Bahrain was a protectorate of the British empire and the busiest trading centre in the Gulf. In the 1950s, its strategic importance motivated British Overseas Airways Corporation, at the time Britain’s flag carrier, to become a major shareholder in Gulf Aviation, the island’s fledgling local airline. By the 1970s Bahrain had the most developed airline infrastructure in the region. Qatar, Abu Dhabi and Oman rushed to buy stakes in the Bahraini company, forming a multinational carrier: Gulf Air. This accident of history secured Bahrain’s dominance in the skies at a time when air travel was growing in popularity. But in the first decade of this century, Qatar, Abu Dhabi and Oman pulled out of Gulf Air and pumped vast sums of money into their own national airlines. Emirates, Dubai’s flag carrier, had already overtaken Gulf Air as the region’s best-known airline. It did so not by attracting passengers to Dubai itself, but by marketing the city as a stopover for intercontinental flights. Qatar Airways and Abu Dhabi’s Etihad Airways copied its model. Against this competitive backdrop, Gulf Air floundered. In 2014, when Gulliver last wrote about the airline, Bahrain’s transport minister was publicly bemoaning how “no one wants” the top job at the company. But, last November, the kingdom found new hope in the form of Kresimir Kucko, the former boss of Croatia Airlines, another flag carrier struggling to find its path in a region dominated by larger competitors. Mr Kucko’s strategy is now gradually taking shape. Gulf Air has committed to take delivery of 39 new aircraft by 2023. This year will see the launch of eight new destinations in the Middle East, north Africa, India and the Caucasus. Next year will bring a renewed push into Western Europe, where the airline used to have a deep footprint. Gulf Air also plans to tap into the connecting flows that proved so lucrative for its neighbours, specifically by connecting Africa with China. Eventually, North America will also be targeted. “The question is when”, Mr Kucko says. “We need to build a sufficient and sustainable feeder network in order to make this…biggest jump in our network.” A return to growth will please Bahrain’s rulers, who have always considered Gulf Air an ambassador for the kingdom and a catalyst for economic growth. Its high-end reputation allows the airline to compete on quality rather than quantity—a fight it lost years ago. But the strategy is risky. Few companies make money while investing heavily in new markets, and Bahrain’s parliament has never been shy about holding the airline to account. Lawmakers will need to be patient if Mr Kucko is to have any chance of writing a new chapter in the history of Gulf aviation.