IT HAS been a busy week for anyone with even a passing interest in North-East Asian geopolitics. On April 17th the Washington Post reported that Mike Pompeo, the director of the CIA, went to meet North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong Un, in Pyongyang over the Easter weekend. The apparent intention of the visit was to prepare for a meeting between Mr Kim and Donald Trump in May or early June. A day later South Korean officials confirmed that talks about permanent peace on the Korean peninsula were on the table for a summit between Mr Kim and Moon Jae-in, South Korea’s president, on April 27th, along with a joint statement on “denuclearisation”. This is all a far cry from the situation only months ago, when Mr Kim’s frequent missile tests had diplomats worried that the world was on the brink of nuclear war. So is the current flurry of activity cause for optimism? In principle, bringing North Korea back into international society would be a boon. The world at large would no longer have to put up with Mr Kim’s sabre-rattling provocations. South Korea and Japan, North Korea’s neighbours, might benefit from a new market just next door. For ordinary North Koreans an opening of the country would be even better news. Currently they are not just suffering from the oppressive policies of Mr Kim’s regime—which delights in staging public executions and sending citizens to prison camps for such innocuous activities as listening to K-pop—but also from complete isolation from the world. They cannot visit family members in the South, nor receive visitors from there. And the dense thicket of international sanctions against their country prevents them from taking advantage of the opportunities offered by the global economy. Next week’s summit between Messrs Kim and Moon may go some way towards easing these pains, for example by establishing regular inter-Korean meetings and enabling further cultural exchanges between the two Koreas. But the kind of rapprochement needed to end the pain for good is still a long way off, for all Mr Trump’s insistence that Mr Pompeo formed a “good relationship” with Mr Kim during his recent visit. This is because the parties—America, North Korea and South Korea, and also Japan and China—are hardly on the same page about the conditions required for a sustained thaw. Mr Trump seems to believe that America’s policy of “maximum pressure” (the thorough implementation of sanctions accompanied by the threat of preventive military action) has brought North Korea to the negotiating table and that Mr Kim may be willing to abandon his nuclear programme in return for sanctions relief. Yet there has been no indication that Mr Kim is prepared to make any meaningful concessions in this regard. Instead he is reaping the benefits of talks with the world’s top diplomats while spouting the same phrases as his father and grandfather before him. Both Kims senior stressed their commitment to “denuclearisation”. But rather than the end of their own nuclear programme, they meant the withdrawal of American troops and the nuclear umbrella over South Korea and Japan, both of which they demanded as conditions for possible concessions by the North. This means that unless there is a marked change in the North’s attitude, the current round of talks seems unlikely to yield any substantial results. Indeed, Mr Trump has already indicated that he may walk away if Mr Kim does not show himself to be amenable to America’s aims. The bigger danger is that he does not, and instead makes rash concessions that allow North Korea to divide America from its regional allies.