THE Rittbitten is as characteristic of Erlstätt, a village in southern Bavaria, as the onion dome of its church and the Alpine peaks on its horizon. Each year villagers gather at the Gasthaus Fliegl restaurant, where, accompanied by a brass band in lederhosen, the religious Saint George Society invites locals to join an Easter Monday horseback ride. It is respect for the old ways, says Andreas Fliegl, that has made this place so successful: “We have the lowest unemployment in Germany.” He is thinking of entering his restaurant in a competition, created by Marcus Söder, the new Bavarian premier, to find the state’s best “Heimat inn”. Heimat means home, but also tradition, belonging and place. In Bavaria, it is the front line of a big political experiment. At the general election last September the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) did best in Germany’s formerly communist east, which suffers from economic decline, antipathy to refugees and weak connections to established parties. In contrast, Bavaria is rich, has managed migrant inflows more smoothly than other states and has its own deep-rooted conservative party: Mr Söder’s Christian Social Union (CSU). Yet in Bavaria, the CSU lost more than ten points of support at the election, while the AfD rose eight points to 12%. Horst Seehofer, the then party leader, blamed Angela Merkel and her liberal refugee policies, even though the CSU, which took a tougher line on migrants, suffered a worse fall than Mrs Merkel’s party, the Christian Democrats (CDU). After the election Mr Söder, the traditionalists’ favourite, toppled Mr Seehofer. Bavaria faces a state election in October, and polls show the CSU could lose its majority for only the second time in 54 years. The AfD could even come second. So the CSU is concentrating on the law-and-order issues that motivate right-wing voters. In federal coalition talks it managed to get Mr Seehofer the post of interior minister in Berlin, a handy platform for flaunting his party’s conservatism. In Munich, Mr Söder promises more armed police, surveillance and immigrant deportation centres. This strategy has a second prong: an aggressive politics of identity and belonging. On the CSU’s insistence, Mr Seehofer will also occupy a new post of federal “Heimat minister”, responsible for integration and cultural politics. Alexander Dobrindt, the party’s leader in the Bundestag, wants a “conservative revolution” against liberal values. Mr Söder promises crucifixes on the walls of all public buildings to assert the primacy of “Christian-Western” culture. Most contentiously, on March 16th Mr Seehofer opined that “Islam is not part of Germany”. The next week in the Bundestag he added the phrase “in any form”, in defiance of Germany’s more than 4m Muslims. “Multiculturalism has failed. Political correctness is no Heimat,” Mr Dobrindt said on March 25th. While the CSU expropriates the AfD’s themes in Bavaria, a sort of experimental control is being conducted in the rest of Germany. Under Mrs Merkel and Annegret-Kramp Karrenbauer, the party’s new general secretary, the CDU is steering clear of culture wars in favour of bread-and-butter issues like safe streets and living standards. Both women rejected Mr Seehofer’s claim. “Islam has become part of Germany,” countered the chancellor in the Bundestag. Which branch of Germany’s centre-right more efficiently marginalises the AfD will offer lessons for mainstream parties fighting populists across Europe. The echoes of this experiment will be heard far beyond Bavaria’s Alps.