LOVERS of live music in Tamanrasset, a mountainous city in Southern Algeria, need look no further than a wedding for their fix. They are where most local bands make their name, according to Iyad Moussa Ben Abderahmane, the lead singer of Imarhan, a six-member group that grew up there. The celebratory audience might not be the harshest of critics—the only reliable measurement of success is whether you are invited to play again at another wedding. But for young upstarts, it’s the best way to test their mettle in front of a live crowd. Those after a career beyond the local wedding circuit usually have to rely on the investigative skills of savvy scouts from overseas who come to Algeria seeking hidden talent, Mr Abderahmane says. But most of the country’s borders have been closed since 2006; it is harder for people to visit and experience their music now. Imarhan were lucky. Since they first formed in 2008 the group of friends have gone from doing the rounds of the nuptials scene to touring the globe playing to audiences in Europe to Asia and now America. Their first album, released in 2016, drew comparisons to Tinariwen, the Grammy award-winning Tuareg musicians from Mali who also first got together in Tamanrasset. That is not all that surprising. At the heart of Tinariwen’s meditative desert-blues lies the distinct rhythm of the region: the beat of the drum, or tinde, moves in sync with the camels that walk and the wind that flows across the vast swathes of the Sahara. And the electric guitars that give Tinariwen that rugged edge are now—decades after they were first introduced to the region in the 1980s—a staple. Yet “Temet” (“Connections”), Imarhan’s latest album, is purposefully fresher—a deliberate attempt to stamp their own unique mark on the tradition of Tuareg music. Partly through their tousled hair and leather jackets, partly through their crunchy guitar playing, the sextet are now earning themselves a reputation for rock’n’roll both at home and further afield. Rolling Stone reckons that they, among other artists from west Africa, are in their own way keeping the genre alive, just as Western rock artists turn to electronic dance music for their inspiration. The album has two parts, each suited to very different settings. In the first, Imarhan, the modernisers, come out in full force. Songs like “Alwa”, with its synthesisers and multiple drums, offer what Mr Abderahmane says is the “different colour of our desert… a different type of atmosphere”. They possess an indescribable energy when experienced live that transfixed the audience at Moth Club, a working-man’s club come disco space in London’s East End, last month. Dripping with sweat and revelling in the jubilant atmosphere, fans flung their arms and swung their hips as the band pummelled drums; they chimed in chorus to tracks like “Ehad wa dagh”. It is little wonder why newlyweds would want the sextet to carry them through their celebrations. But in the second part of the album this rock-and-roll persona is paired down. Softer and slower, these songs are much closer to Imarhan’s traditional Tuareg roots and thus demand a more focused setting. Unfortunately, while the Moth Club's small, albeit eclectic, space is a perfect match for wedding-style festivities, it is less so for meditative wanderings. After a setlist focused on mostly up-tempo tracks, those on a high could not settle—much to the despair of other audience members. In some ways that meant the real gems of the album were lost. Though the same melodies that power the first half are used, the second section sees the electricity of the guitar quietly improve, not dominate, each song. “Tarha Nam” marks the change; its rocking rhythms soothe. But “Tochal” is equally beautiful, possessing a lightness that lifts the listener from the madness of the urban sprawl to the dry and hazy heat of the Algerian desert, sand in their hair and boots, not a care in the world. The finest track is “Ma S-Abok”; softer and more nuanced, the undulating rhythms lilt to lyrics that reflect on the importance of community. It is the crux of the album and shows how this collaborative environment has helped musicians in Tamanrasset succeed. “You won’t find people have the means, or the gear, to play music, so they will share all their instruments and their gear,” says Mr Abderahmane. These days Imarhan are reliant on the equipment and the know-how of musicians and studios overseas: “Temet” was produced in Paris; their first endeavour was on a German label. And though fame and fortune no doubt feature in their ambitions, their biggest goals remain grounded in the desert. They hope to spread the Tuareg sound, so that it can continue to evolve, and to set up their own studio, so that others in the region can record and make their mark on the evolution of Tuareg. 