PEOPLE used to joke, “Welcome to Guernsey, please put your watch back 50 years,” recalls Tony Lee, who moved to the island in the 1970s to work as a doctor. The British crown dependency off the coast of France, formerly part of the ancient duchy of Normandy, is a conservative place (its politics are characterised by “inertia”, notes one politician). Only in 2015 did all shops gain the right to trade on a Sunday, for instance, and its narrow lanes are dotted with churches. All this makes it an unlikely location for the trailblazing introduction of a controversial policy. Nevertheless, in May the island’s parliament, the States of Deliberation, will vote on whether to legalise assisted dying. If its 40 members come down in favour, a working party would examine issues like whether to restrict the right to those with terminal illnesses, and how doctors’ approval might work, before returning with a fleshed-out proposal in 18 months. Such a vote would set Guernsey on the path to becoming the first place in the British Isles to legalise assisted dying—and, in doing so, raise thorny constitutional questions. Politicians on both sides expect the vote to be close. Gavin St Pier, Guernsey’s chief minister and the lead signatory of the assisted-dying requête, which is similar to a private member’s bill in Westminster, says campaigners have learnt from other islanders who recently voted in favour of assisted dying—in Hawaii—and are focusing their message on personal freedom, rather than death. #MyCareMyChoice runs the favoured hashtag. But the island’s churches remain powerful, and they have been assisted by those farther afield. “Let there be no death clinics in Guernsey,” declared the Bishop of Portsmouth in a letter read out on Easter Sunday. “I appeal to Catholics to mobilise. Speak out against this proposal. It is never permissible to do good by an evil means.” They are allied with politicians who warn that the introduction of assisted dying would clog up the island’s small bureaucracy. It would certainly not be easy to lead the way. The first hurdle is posed by the medical profession. Doctors on Guernsey are regulated by the General Medical Council (GMC), the official British body, which directs practitioners to follow the law as it currently stands, and has not said what it would do if the law in Guernsey changed. Some think it might continue to block assisted dying, even if there is a change of law on the island, in order to stay in line with the rules of the mainland. In response, campaigners point out that the GMC allows doctors to follow abortion laws in Northern Ireland that are stricter than those in the rest of the country. Either way, the introduction of the right to die in Guernsey would probably require legislation in Westminster. England’s law on suicide, introduced in 1961, makes it illegal to encourage or assist a patient to end their life, and is rare in being extraterritorial in effect (so that a citizen who commits a crime abroad may be charged at home). Mr St Pier believes that Parliament would have to pass primary legislation to avoid a constitutional wrangle, since Guernsey has the right to govern its domestic affairs. Assisted-dying campaigners are watching closely, as such a law would have ramifications for other parts of Britain with devolved powers. These hurdles give succour to those campaigning against assisted dying. The issue—a tricky question for a legislature of any size, let alone a body of 40, all of whom are independents—has caused angst among the island’s 63,000 residents. But the requête’s proponents make no excuses. As Hunter Adam, a retired doctor and former health minister, says: “It’s not about doctors. It’s not about churchgoers. It’s about what people want when they are coming to the end of their lives.”