THE PLACE is London. The time, according to a caption, is “The Great Slump”. A widowed father of three has spent everything he has and more on his late wife’s medical care, and is now about to lose his house to the bank. To twist the knife, he works at the bank himself, having abandoned his dreams of being an artist. Not only that, but his father worked there, too—and his surname is actually Banks. “Everything’s falling to pieces,” he sobs. Those of us living in Britain in 2018 may be inclined to mutter, “Trust me, mate, I know how you feel.” Surprisingly, this bleak scenario does not appear in a Ken Loach drama. It appears in “Mary Poppins Returns”, Disney’s long-awaited sequel to its most beloved live-action musical, the magnificent “Mary Poppins” (1964), starring Julie Andrews as the magical nanny from P.L. Travers’s books. The widowed father (Ben Whishaw) is John, who was one of the two children Mary cared for in the original film, and who has since had his life ruined by a lying, cheating banker. The other child, Jane (Emily Mortimer), now spends her time campaigning for workers’ rights. But the film doesn’t stick with the political themes introduced in its early scenes. “Paddington 2”, another sequel based on a series of children’s books set in London, was overtly in favour of welcoming immigrants and, more generally, being kind to strangers, whereas “Mary Poppins Returns” makes do with the all-purpose Disney bromide that “anything is possible, even the impossible”. And it is determinedly not about the present day. The film’s only concessions to the passage of time since 1964 are the inclusion of a couple of non-white actors and a regrettable sequence involving BMX bikes. Maybe that is the point. Maybe the director, Rob Marshall (who made the Oscar-winning “Chicago”), and the screenwriter, David Magee, felt that the only way to wash off the grime of the 21st century was to plunge into a bubble bath of nostalgia. Their film has moved the Banks family on from the 1910s to the 1930s, but you will struggle to think of a sequel which takes such pains to imitate its predecessor. It is as much a remake as it is a reboot, so if you have seen “Mary Poppins”—and you should—you will know the story. A brusquely enigmatic super-nanny (now played by Emily Blunt) floats down from the skies to 17 Cherry Tree Lane, where she takes charge of the Banks children. She has a Cockney sidekick played by an American (Lin-Manuel Miranda) who can’t do a Cockney accent. She takes the children on outings to their father’s bank in the City, to the house of an eccentric relative (Meryl Streep), and to an enchanted realm where live-action actors interact with animated animals—animated, no less, in the same hand-drawn style as they were in the 1960s. It is impressive to see how, again and again, the film-makers take an element from “Mary Poppins” and then change it ever-so-slightly. For example, the animated sequence in the original film takes place in a chalk pavement drawing; in the sequel, the characters dive into the glaze on a Royal Doulton bowl. It is impressive, too, to see how close everything comes to the wondrous standards set by “Mary Poppins”. “Mary Poppins Returns” is packed with snazzy costumes, bright-eyed performances, and polished song and dance numbers. Unlike so many sequels, it doesn’t position itself as part of a continuing franchise. It aims to be nothing more than lavish, sweet-natured family entertainment—and it succeeds. It might have been better, though, if the film it had tried to be more than just a meticulous tribute to a superior antecedent. True, it was never likely that a Disney movie would explore the dark clouds that hang over the opening scenes, but it could have been more ambitious and imaginative in other ways. Once you twig that it is following assiduously in the footsteps of “Mary Poppins”, it starts to feel oppressively predictable. Mary tells her charges that “anything is possible”, but it seems to be impossible for them to do anything that wasn’t done in another film, 54 years ago. There is one other issue. Throughout “Mary Poppins Returns”, Michael and Jane are searching high and low for a share certificate which might just save them from penury, so why doesn’t Mary help them? We all know she can tidy a room with a click of her fingers. Would it really have killed her to use her witchy powers to find one piece of paper?