IF THERE IS a city in the world where the persecution of all religions and beliefs is studied exhaustively, it is Washington, DC. In accordance with American law, two agencies are perpetually watching for infringements and calling out violators. Those agencies are the State Department and the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF), an advisory panel appointed by Congress and the White House. The USCIRF generally adopts a harsher view than the State Department, which has to take into account America’s broader foreign-policy interests. This week, however, the State Department toughened its line against one country that regularly makes headlines about religious persecution: Pakistan. Sam Brownback, a former senator who serves as the department’s religious-freedom ambassador, said Pakistan was being added to the list of “countries of particular concern” (CPC), ie, especially severe violators. The American move, it was explained, reflected the dreadful number of criminal blasphemy cases in that country. As Mr Brownback noted, half the people jailed for blasphemy in the world are in Pakistan. Many face the possibility of execution, at least theoretically. The highest-profile case has been that of Asia Bibi, a Pakistani Christian woman who spent years on death row because of a flimsy charge of blasphemy. She was recently acquitted, but then barred from leaving the country under a political bargain that was struck after Islamist hardliners protested and issued death threats. Supporters of Ms Bibi, who was apparently the victim of a petty row with her Muslim neighbours over the use of a well, say she is still in danger. Pakistan thus joins a list of serious violators (in American eyes) whose other members are China, Eritrea, Iran, Myanmar, North Korea, Sudan, Saudi Arabia, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan. Being on such a list can in theory incur American sanctions. However, Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, made it plain that he would waive punitive measures against Pakistan because of broader diplomatic considerations. Both Mr Brownback and Mr Pompeo seemed keen to limit the diplomatic fallout from Pakistan’s designation. Mr Brownback said: “It’s our hope that the new leadership in Pakistan will work to improve the situation…There [were] some encouraging signs recently on how they’ve handled the recent protesting…and we continue to watch carefully what’s happening to Asia Bibi.” Even as the State Department rebuked Pakistan, it gave a somewhat more favourable assessment of Uzbekistan, a country whose regime has won notoriety for its intolerance of dissent. Uzbekistan was taken off the CPC list but it was placed in another, slightly less severe, category called “special watch”, along with the Comoros Islands and Russia. Uzbekistan, which has dealt harshly with Christian missionaries and with dissident forms of Islam, tried this year to improve its religious-freedom profile. During the summer, when Mr Pompeo convened a “ministerial [meeting] to advance religious freedom”, four members of Uzbekistan’s government flew to Washington to showcase their supposedly improved performance. Abdulasia Kalimov, the foreign minister, insisted that respect and tolerance of other religions was a centuries-old tradition in his country. The USCIRF welcomed Pakistan’s inclusion on the list of worst violators. But it complained that a similar status ought to be conferred on Russia, where a broadly worded law on “extremism” is used to persecute Jehovah’s Witnesses and certain Muslim groups. Nor had things improved enough in Uzbekistan to justify its removal from the list of harsh violators, in the USCIRF’s view. So the diplomatic dance in Washington goes on. The hope must be that, somewhere in the world, a few humble believers in this or that religion are treated a bit less badly as a result.