IN 2013 Barry Jenkins was working on two projects concurrently. One was a coming-of-age tale about a black gay youth in a tough Miami neighbourhood. Based on a play, it was narrow in focus but deeply felt; released as “Moonlight” in 2016, it went on to win Best Picture at the Oscars. The other film, an adaptation of a novel by James Baldwin, is released in America this week. “If Beale Street Could Talk” imbues its love story with larger ideas about community, justice and the law. The viewer is informed that “every black person born in America was born on Beale Street”, referring to a road in Memphis, Tennessee, considered a home of the blues. It suggests shared experience and shared pain. Set in 1970s Harlem, Tish (KiKi Layne) and Fonny (Stephan James) have known each other since childhood and were practically raised as family. They fall in love as soon as they become adults. Tish’s family, anchored by the matriarchal Sharon (Regina King), embraces the courtship, but Fonny’s Bible-thumping mother (Aunjanue Ellis) and her teenage daughters consider it a sin. In an early scene both clans gather over drinks as Tish shares news of her pregnancy; Mr Jenkins stages the chaotic aftermath, in which each family turns on the other, with an invigorating mix of humour and pathos. Both families are so passionate about their own children that they do not care about the sting of their words on the other. Fonny’s mother is so consumed with anger and fear that she curses her own unborn grandchild. It is controversial that Tish and Fonny are not married, but it quickly becomes the least of their problems. Fonny is framed for rape by a racist police officer with whom he earlier tussled, and while he waits behind bars, Tish and Sharon work to free him. They run up against the frustrating inequities of the legal system: there are lawyers they cannot afford, and district attorneys who seem to be conspiring to keep Fonny inside. They approach each challenge with near-heroic calm and reason, repressing their justified anger. That is the story told simply but, following Mr Baldwin’s lead, Mr Jenkins frequently switches between timelines (it is usually easy to discern which period is in focus). Even as the young lovers find happiness—with his undulating camera and natural lighting, Mr Jenkins borrows from Terrence Malick in portraying love as a sort of ethereal state—hardship unfolds. In one long, drawn-out flashback scene, for example, Fonny meets with Daniel (Brian Tyree Henry), a friend. Over beer and cigarettes, they laugh about the old days, until Daniel reveals the details of his recent incarceration. Daniel’s face turns cold, while Mr Jenkins pivots the camera back and forth to get Fonny’s terrified reactions, as if it is dawning on him what the future holds. The rhythms of this scene, slow and deliberate, set it apart from the pace of the rest of the film. Elsewhere, Sharon undertakes a trip to Puerto Rico, where she tries to convince Fonny’s accuser to recant her testimony. Ms King shines as a mother dedicated to protecting her child’s happiness and realising that she may not have the tools to do so. Each of these moments deepens the film’s inquiry into how institutional racism destroys lives, imprisoning the innocent, breaking up families and creating suffering. “If Beale Street Could Talk” occasionally feels episodic—albeit with intensely powerful moments—but it is exquisitely filmed with epochal detail and realised by a talented roster of actors. Mr James and Ms Layne offer compelling lead performances. Mr James, who also stars in “Homecoming”, a recent Amazon series, cements his new-found leading-man status. Ms Layne’s is less impressive on the surface. She plays Tish as innocent and childlike, so much so that the impact of the difficulties that befall her is never acutely felt. But it is largely through her eyes and her voiceover that the viewer comes to understand the world that the film inhabits, and she is an effective guide. Through this broken narrative, Mr Jenkins constructs an argument that the black American experience is jarring and traumatic, but he juxtaposes joy and despair to emphasise his characters’ strength rather than their suffering. He wrenches a more promising message—that of love conquering all—from their trials. Much like “Moonlight”, this is a major achievement and an unforgettable film. “If Beale Street Could Talk” is released in America from December 14th and in Britain on February 8th