SISTER WENDY led the life of a very skilled tightrope-walker, and millions of people seemed to enjoy watching her perform. She was, on the face of things, a fairly old-fashioned Catholic nun, not the new-fangled sort who engages in social work and wears ordinary clothes. Wendy Beckett entered a religious congregation, one with a teaching vocation, at the age of 16, and lived a life of committed celibacy for another seven decades. Her will to spend many hours a day in prayer seemed unshakeable until her death on December 26th at the age of 88. One turning-point in her life came in 1970. After developing epilepsy, she migrated from South Africa to Britain. Here, she left her teaching order, but in no way did she abandon her religious vocation. Instead she settled in a mobile home in the grounds of a convent run by the strict Carmelite order and continued to live in these Spartan conditions for much of her remaining life. Yet amid all this austerity, she became a kind of global TV celebrity, delighting viewers with her discerning and yet digestible ideas on the history of art. The New York Times once said she might be considered as the most influential art critic in the history of television. She travelled the world, fielded questions from some of the world’s best-known interviewers, and whether she liked it or not was wined and dined in glamorous places. Her screen career started with a BBC series in 1992 which showed up her natural gift for speaking confidently in front of a camera. She could find merit in an extraordinary range of artistic styles without seeming banal or gushing. What amazed many people, and dismayed a few of them, was her delight in the portrayal of the unclothed human body. Presented with Michangelo’s famous rendering of God and Adam in the Sistine Chapel, she noted that man’s Biblical forebear was “sprawled there in his naked male glory″ but still awaiting the call to life from his Creator. She loved the tender depiction of a naked woman’s back in a work called “The Bather″ by Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, a French neo-classical master. Pablo Picasso’s contemporaries may have been shocked by his rendering of five prostitutes in “Les Demoiselles d’Avignon″, but Sister Wendy was not.  People generally appreciated her insights but some wondered how they could be squared with her own persona as a woman clad in an austere habit whose thick glasses and prominent teeth seemed the very opposite of sensual. Some purist lovers of Christian art probably baulked at her enthusiasm for the Italian Renaissance, a time when artists continued to depict religious subjects (among others) but seemed less devoted to God and more concerned with showing off the beauty and genius of man, as well as their own talents and the wealth of their patrons. Challenged about these apparent contradictions, Sister Wendy always replied with confidence and intelligence. The fact that some people, including her, were called to a life of spiritually committed celibacy should not, so she insisted, be taken to imply that the church was against human sexuality or failed to appreciate the beauty of the human body. And in fairness to her, there was nothing about her manner that suggested frustrated prurience lurking under an ultra-conservative appearance. She could wax lyrical about this or that artistic technique, but she was if anything even more unselfconsciously passionate about the rewards of a spiritual life. For her at least such a life was not a “sacrifice″ because she had never wished for anything else, she would stress. Not everybody was convinced. Germaine Greer, the radical feminist writer, challenged Sister Wendy’s competence to describe erotic art while remaining a “consecrated virgin″ herself. To this the nun would retort that Jane Austen had managed to write great romantic fiction while remaining unmarried. Among her more controversial opinions was qualified approval of a work by an American photographer, Andres Serrano, showing a Christian crucifix immersed in urine. The work could be interpreted as a critique of the way modern man had despised the self-sacrifice of Jesus Christ, she thought. In her view, it was not a great work of art, because it was not the kind of thing one would want to look at twice, but it might be a valid piece of commentary. Some American religious conservatives took a different view. For example, Senator Jesse Helms protested furiously about the fact that this blasphemous artist had been supported with taxpayers’ money. Sister Wendy generally thought that people should reserve judgment on contemporary works of art, because it took time to establish whether a painting really had the depth and power to make people return to it, and seek new layers of meaning, in successive generations. It is equally difficult to know what posterity will make of her. But unlike most celebrities, she would not have regarded the approval of the crowd, now or in the future, as the main yardstick of success. She edified and intrigued people all over the world, but she would always have said that her devotion to God came first.