OF ALL THE controversies thrown up by America’s cultural wars, abortion remains perhaps the most divisive. This was the issue that Ronald Reagan used to try to unite northern Catholics and southern evangelical Protestants behind his Republican presidential bid in 1980. When he succeeded, Democrats responded in kind by becoming the party of pro-choice crusaders. Over the years the battles between the pro-life and pro-choice camps have become more acrimonious, even violent, with death threats, firebombs and, in a few instances, the murder of doctors or other staff at clinics that perform abortions. But while the arguments have continued to rage, the number of abortions has actually dropped of late. According to figures recently released by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in 2015 there were 638,169 abortions, at a rate of 11.8 abortions per 1,000 women; in 2006 there were 842,855 abortions at a rate of 15.9 per 1,000 women. Abortions are now at their lowest numbers since the passage in 1973 of Roe v Wade, the Supreme Court’s ruling that declared abortion a constitutional right. The drop can be seen in all age groups, but is especially pronounced among teenagers. From 2006 to 2015, the abortion rate for 15- to 19-year-olds more than halved. The report also showed that abortions are being performed earlier in pregnancy, and therefore more safely. The percentage performed during the first six weeks of gestation rose by 11%. The reasons for these changing numbers offer grounds for hope. As has happened across the developed world, the number of unintended pregnancies has fallen in America as the use of contraceptives has spread, particularly among young people. Yet there is also cause for concern. America differs from many rich countries in introducing restrictions on access to abortion that make them harder to get, less safe and much costlier. Between 2010 and 2016 states enacted 338 such restrictions. On September 10th a three-judge panel on the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals overturned a lower-court ruling that had blocked Missouri from enforcing regulations that could close all but one of the state’s abortion clinics. Earlier this month Ohio’s House of Representatives passed one of the most restrictive abortion bills in the country, which would ban abortions in instances where a fetal heartbeat can be detected. (This can be as early as six weeks into a pregnancy, when most women are unaware they are pregnant.) The measure has no exceptions for rape or incest, only for a medical emergency or if an abortion would save a woman’s life. The CDC findings come at a worrying time for abortion-rights activists. In addition to the increasingly bold pushes from conservative lawmakers to all but ban abortions, they fret that Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh, President Donald Trump’s appointees to the Supreme Court, could help overturn Roe v Wade. This would allow state legislatures to introduce strict abortion laws without the risk that they will be branded unconstitutional. In four states (Louisiana, Mississippi, North Dakota and South Dakota) that have so-called trigger laws, abortions would immediately become illegal if Roe v Wade falls. This argument will not end soon.