ADAPTATIONS of “To Kill a Mockingbird”, Harper Lee’s Pulitzer prize-winning novel of race, prejudice and bravery in the American south, are rare. There was a film in 1962, starring Gregory Peck; Monroeville, Alabama, Lee’s hometown and the supposed setting for the book, runs a production in the courthouse each May. Both of these interpretations stay largely true to the original text, and are popular as a result. The film won Horton Foote a Best Adapted Screenplay Oscar. Monroeville’s plays, allowing “attendees an opportunity to transport themselves back to the time of the book’s setting”, sell out. A new Broadway production, written by Aaron Sorkin (“The West Wing”, “The Social Network”, “A Few Good Men”), has proved more controversial. In 2016, weeks before her death, Lee gave her approval for it to go ahead even though “she abhors anything that trades on the book’s fame”. In March this year her estate sued the producers on the grounds that the script was a “fundamental rethink” of the story. They pointed to the larger role of Calpurnia (LaTanya Richardson Jackson), the Finches’ maid, changes to the character of Atticus (Jeff Daniels) and an interview with Mr Sorkin in which he claimed to be offering a “different take” on the tale so well-known from classrooms. A month later, the production countersued, offering to perform the show in a New York court. The case was settled before opening night. It is true that Mr Sorkin diverges from Lee’s novel in noticeable ways, and is less reverent of the original text (“I wasn’t going to swaddle the book in bubble wrap and transfer it gently to a stage,” he has said). Plenty is left on the cutting-room floor: although narrated by her, events are not wholly filtered through Scout’s childlike, unreliable perspective; many of the secondary and tertiary Maycomb characters have been lost, including members of the Finch family; there is no jury in the courtroom scenes; the important Boo Radley subplot gets less focus. Many of these changes are probably logistical sacrifices, made to keep the running time to two-and-a-half hours. The most significant edits are to characterisation, and they are not always an improvement. In many cases the good are made better and the bad, worse. Bob Ewell’s abuse of his daughter Mayella is not simply alluded to, but laid bare for the audience to see. Rather than deducing Dill’s mother’s flaws through his stories, they are demonstrated in a new scene. This robs figures of their complexity. Whether the production does that to Calpurnia and Atticus is questionable. Among the terms of the settlement, according to Mr Sorkin, were that Atticus’s new drinking habit would be excised, along with the shotgun secreted in his closet and exclamations of “goddammit”. The production kept his harsher moments in the script—including an outburst of violence—and Calpurnia’s larger role. Mr Sorkin stages scenes between the two characters, which touch on masculinity and the memory of the civil war, and acknowledge the power dynamics in their relationship. The dialogue could easily feel anachronistic, but it is deftly handled. Still, Calpurnia’s character is not expanded beyond the limits of her service to the Finches. When she is not talking alone with Atticus, she is reduced to simply chiming in from across the room. Ms Richardson Jackson offers a compelling performance, but her character feels always at risk of devolving into stereotype. Atticus, meanwhile, is not the idealised figure he once was. Mr Sorkin works hard to emphasise the contemporary relevance of the story, and the question of how far communities should tolerate those who refuse to tolerate others. Where Atticus’s willingness to search for the good in others is his great strength in the book, it is presented as a flaw and a weakness in the play. It seems to be a nod to the racist version of Atticus as written in “Go Set a Watchman”, though Mr Sorkin has said that he has not read the book, published in 2015. He was inspired instead by President Donald Trump’s mealy-mouthed comments about white supremacists in Charlottesville, Virginia. The writing can on occasion be distracting. Mr Sorkin has a weakness for didactic speeches and seems to have developed a habit of repeating variations of those if he is particularly proud of (this reviewer noticed two that had echoes of scenes in “The West Wing”). But at its best, it is in harmony with Lee’s. The moments between Atticus and his children have a feeling of warmth and respect that readers will delight in recognising from the book, matched with Mr Sorkin’s signature fast-paced, precise dialogue. If some of the creative choices do not always pay off, this new adaptation of “To Kill a Mockingbird” is still to be applauded. Simply transferring this beloved tale from page to stage is one thing; attempting to meld two narrative and writing styles is a much bolder endeavour. Incorporating the novel’s post-publication history is a shrewd move. It asks provocative questions of its American audience, and is a reminder of why Lee’s work deserves to be returned to time and again.