IN THE 1940s, when Amos Oz’s father had to choose a primary school for his son, there were two options within walking distance of their home in Jerusalem—a religious school or one belonging to a Socialist-Zionist workers’ union. Yehuda Klausner, a staunchly secular academic and right-wing nationalist, chose to send him to the religious school, reckoning that the important thing was that Mr Oz shun Bolshevism. While socialism was spreading like wildfire, religion was on the wane and would soon disappear from the land. He was wrong both on a national and a personal level. In the new state of Israel, socialists would dominate for the first three decades but then gradually lose their dominance. Religion endured. As for young Mr Oz, shaken by his mother’s suicide, he would rebel against his father, leaving Jerusalem at 14 to become a member of a kibbutz, a Socialist-Zionist agricultural collective. There the haunted young man would try and recreate himself, even changing his name from the Ashkenazi diasporic Klausner, to Oz, a short, stark and austere Hebrew word meaning courage. Years later he said that was the only thing he lacked. Mr Oz, who died on December 28th, was for half a century Israel’s most celebrated writer, producing fiction, political essays and polemics. In his work, as in his life, he struggled to realise the brave new Jewish state he and his parents’ generation had yearned for. His early work was, like him, torn between the utopian experiment of the kibbutz he tried so hard to be a part of, and the Jerusalem he never fully escaped. His first collection of short stories, “Where the Jackals Howl” (1965), and his first novel, “Elsewhere, Perhaps” (1966), dealt with kibbutz life. But instead of describing his fellow young kibbutzniks as having found peace and satisfaction in tilling the land, he wrote of their “sadness of distance”, how “their hearts go out to other places that are not specific, but are far.” His own heart returned to his birthplace. His breakthrough novel, “My Michael” (1968), was about the tortured fantasies of a doomed young woman in 1950s Jerusalem. “My Michael” was the bestseller that established Mr Oz as Israel’s foremost author, and it was translated into more than 30 languages. Only 34 years later, when his monumental memoir, “A Tale of Love and Darkness”, was published, did it become clear that he had been writing about his own mother. But literary success and confronting his own personal demons was never enough for Mr Oz, who publicly wrestled with Israel’s internal furies throughout his writing career. In 1967, during the six-day war, he served as a speech-writer for Israel’s victorious generals. At the time he had believed in the war as a justified action of defence against hostile Arab neighbours. But as Israel began to grapple with the realities of a military occupation of millions of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, he was one of the first to warn his fellow citizens. “We were not born to be a nation of masters,” he wrote in a column in Davar, the newspaper of the ruling socialist party. Ten years later Likud came to power, and in the years since, Israel has mostly been ruled by a coalition of right-wing and religious nationalists, bent on remaining masters of the land. Mr Oz became one of the leading lights of Israel’s peace camp, and a confidante of politicians including Shimon Peres, a prime minister and president. At the same time, he repeatedly tried to engage with the Jewish settlers in the West Bank and other sections of Israel’s society with whom he had bitter differences. While much of his international renown was a result of his 19 novels and collections of short stories, for many Israelis, the true-life accounts of his journeys throughout the land and his meetings with its inhabitants were of even greater importance. “In the Land of Israel”, a collection of Mr Oz’s journalistic essays from the early 1980s on conversations with Israelis and Palestinians, is still read as a pivotal documentary on life in Israel and the West Bank. It also inspired a generation of Israeli and Jewish writers (including your correspondent) to become journalists. As the Israeli occupation of Palestinians remained unresolved, Mr Oz, like other liberal Israelis with prominent international voices, increasingly found himself harshly criticising his country at home while defending it abroad. On his 75th birthday in Tel Aviv, he warned of the presence of “Hebrew Neo-Nazis” in Israel. However, he supported Israel’s recent wars in Lebanon and Gaza as necessary acts of defence against “the dark shadows of Iran, Syria and fanatic Islam”. He argued Israel’s case with a historical comparison he made in his memoir: “Out there, in the world, all the walls were covered with graffiti: ‘Yids, go back to Palestine,’ so we came back to Palestine, and now the world at large shouts at us: ‘Yids, get out of Palestine.’” Mr Oz’s last novel, “Judas” (2014), was his final literary return to Jerusalem, to those young doomed academics—like his parents—in Israel’s early years, struggling to make sense of Jewish history and of their own present. He was never to find peace. He had left the torn city 60 years earlier, but was never fully at home in Kibbutz Hulda. He moved to the Negev desert town of Arad, and lived his last years in the secular and liberal enclave of Tel Aviv. In those years, he continued to write, publishing collections of essays on Jewish literature, fanaticism and love. In his last interview, two months before his death, he described himself as “an involved citizen who writes a lot”.