ANYBODY WRITING a history of American popular culture from the middle of the 20th century onwards will come across two striking facts. First, sentimental songs about the winter holidays, touching to a greater or (usually) lesser degree on the Christian story of the Nativity, became an important common denominator for a diverse nation. Second, the composers of these songs were in the great majority Jewish. Take the most obvious example: “I’m Dreaming of a White Christmas”. Written by Irving Berlin, who was born in Tsarist Russia as Israel Beilin, the song has been described as the most successful ever recorded. Released a few weeks after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbour, its seductive picture of “treetops [that] glisten” and “sleigh bells in the snow” would come as balm to nostalgic American soldiers and give their families a romantic image of a country that virtually all of them, regardless of ethnicity of creed, were now determined to defend. It idealised the country they were all fighting for. Bing Crosby reportedly said the hardest thing he ever did was to render that song to a crowd of moist-eyed American GIs in Europe in 1944, many of whom who would soon die fighting the Nazis. The contribution of Jews to American winter medleys gets an unusual treatment in an exuberant, newish musical documentary by Larry Weinstein, a Canadian film director. “Dreaming of a Jewish Christmas” was released a year ago but it is now reaching a wider audience after being picked up by the BBC in Britain as well as PBS, which recently broadcast it in the United States. Although it features contributions from many composers and cultural historians, the documentary is playfully set in a Chinese restaurant—the sort of place that North American Jews often frequented on Christmas Day because they were among the few establishments that remained open. Elena Kagan, a Jewish member of the American Supreme Court, drew knowing laughter in 2010 when, at a confirmation hearing, she referred to eating Chinese at Christmas. The story of Jewish-written Christmas songs is full of enjoyable irony. A popular one (pictured) that speaks of “Chestnuts roasting on an open Fire, Jack Frost nipping at your nose, Yuletide carols in the choir….” was in fact penned on a blistering day in Chicago. Mel Torme and his collaborator Bob Wells were trying to escape the heat, at least mentally, by conjuring up those ice-cold word-pictures. Torme was born in Illinois to Russian Jewish parents whose surname was Torma. What about Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, who took America by storm at Christmas 1949 and has been prancing along ever since? That was one of a plethora of Yuletide ditties by Johnny Marks (1909-85), a Jewish song-writer whose other successes included “Rockin’ around the Christmas Tree” and “A Holly Jolly Christmas”. Part of the documentary’s argument is that these jaunty songs answered America’s need for a generic culture of celebration that transcended divisions between white Anglo-Saxons and more recent immigrants, Christians and those of other faiths, and perhaps even black and white—at least if you factor in the role of Nat King Cole as crooner-in-chief of the “roasting chestnuts” medley. This need for an inclusive popular culture dovetailed, the film suggests, with the desire of American Jews to enter the mainstream of a nation where many so doors were still half-closed to them. Did Rudolph’s cheerful advent signal a final disconnect between an all-purpose winter celebration, and the Christian story of a Saviour’s birth in Bethlehem? Well, almost. The story of Santa’s reindeer is based on an 1823 children’s tale about Saint Nicholas, an early Christian bishop who morphed, at least in the Western world, into the white-bearded dispenser of presents to children. But the link between Christ and Rudolph is tenuous to non-existent. One contributor to the documentary makes a similar point in arguing that Irving Berlin’s “White Christmas” served a necessary cultural function for a fast-changing American nation that was mobilising for war. The song, as he puts it, presents a Christmas that is not about Christ but about the more neutral topic of snow. Yet the documentary also finds room for a rather haunting Christmas song, “Do you hear what I hear?” composed in 1962 by Gloria Shayne Baker, a Jewish songwriter who collaborated with her French-born husband. Although it consciously refracts the Christian story (about a King and Saviour entering the world as a precious but vulnerable infant), it was directed at a much wider world audience as an appeal for peace when the Cuban missile crisis threatened general annihilation. It has a tougher and more mysterious message than most Christmas-time schmaltz: