FROM THE moment he descended the escalator at Trump Tower to announce his candidacy on June 16th 2015, crime has been central to Donald Trump’s rhetoric. “They’re bringing drugs,” he said that day, about Mexicans. “They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists.” He has whipped up fear of immigrants committing crimes, despite years of research showing either no relationship between immigration status and crimes, or a beneficial one—meaning that neighbourhoods tend to get safer as immigrants move in. His closing argument in the 2018 mid-terms was simple: “If you want more caravans and more crime,” he told a crowd of supporters in Missouri just hours before polls opened, “vote Democrat.” The problem with these arguments is that over the past couple of decades, America’s foreign-born population has grown as its crime rate has declined. Slight upticks in the latter in 2015 and 2016 helped Mr Trump. But an analysis of preliminary crime data for 2018 released on December 18th by the Brennan Centre, a think-tank and advocacy group, showed that overall crime rates as well as murder rates have resumed their downward trajectories. Across America’s 30 biggest cities, the crime rate is projected to have fallen by 2.7% from 2017 to 2018, while the murder rate is thought to have fallen by 5.8%. Chicago’s murder rate, which spiked in 2015 and 2016, is expected to have declined by 18.1%. Several cities, including Oklahoma City, San Francisco and Charlotte, registered murder-rate declines of 20% or more. Several others, including Washington, DC and Austin, saw similarly steep increases, while El Paso has so far seen twice as many homicides in 2018 as 2017. Crime rates can fluctuate quite a bit from year to year. But the long-term trend is clearer. From 1990 to 2016, rates of overall crime, violent crime and murder all fell sharply, despite a few rises during that time. With violent crime rates and murder rates falling in 2017 and 2018, the 2015-16 rise appears to be more noise than harbinger of a return to the bad old days. Crime rhetoric functions similarly to anti-immigration rhetoric, which has more purchase in white, rural areas than more diverse ones. Such rhetoric works best in places removed from the thing itself. Contrary to what Mr Trump wants people to believe, big cities are not abattoirs where illegal immigrants wield the knives; they are, broadly speaking, increasingly multi-ethnic and increasingly safe.