BEN WHEATLEY is a master of cult indie fare, known for “Free Fire” (2016), a claustrophobic 1970s shoot-out film, and “High-Rise” (2015), a high-concept dystopian drama adapted from a novel by J.G. Ballard. “Happy New Year, Colin Burstead”, his latest film, revisits the more parochial concerns of his early work: it is a blackly comic drama born of the director’s “horror of family arguments” and domestic strife. “I wanted to make something that was close to my own experience, where you can have people that you love and hate at the same time,” he says. “Like, everyone’s a bit of an arse, but really they’re nice people when you get them on their own.” He stages a family war in a British country house. Colin (Neil Maskell), the self-appointed leader, has hired the venue in Dorset—a “four-hour drive”, as all the guests note with practised passive-aggression—for a New Year’s get-together. When Colin learns that David (Sam Riley), his estranged brother, has secretly been invited, the scene is set. Aided by alcohol, long-simmering tensions boil over. Colin clashes with David for abandoning his children and moving to Germany. Mr Wheatley, who was also the screenwriter, brings his signature warped humour to proceedings. He is skilful at depicting the violence and anger lurking beneath mundane everyday interactions, and he gives this film an air of ritual festive bloodletting usually reserved for an “EastEnders” Christmas special. There is furious bickering between the family’s warring members, such as Colin’s hypochondriac mother (Doon Mackichan), alcoholic dad (Bill Paterson) and cross-dressing uncle Bertie (Charles Dance). “When I look at you I do just think, ‘cunt’,” says Colin’s sister, Gini (Hayley Squires), to David in one Hallmark-worthy moment. Of course, rowing with the folks at this time of year is nothing special—along with charades, it is practically an official Christmas sport—and when the film is broadcast on the BBC over the festive period many viewers will surely empathise with the chaos. But “Happy New Year, Colin Burstead” is timely, too. It arrives as the country is in disarray and both sides of the Brexit debate must feel, in uncle Bertie’s words, “like Santa’s just shat down your chimney”. “Happy New Year Colin, You Anus”, the film’s working title, was a punning reference to “Coriolanus”; Shakespeare’s tale of arrogance and simmering class resentment provides a loose narrative framework. Shot in two weeks at the beginning of 2018, the project came after three period movies for the director, who wanted to work on a story that reflected the moment—“and the moment was becoming more and more tense and strange as time went on.” That tension is felt in jokes about Remainers and “project fear”, along with an unexpectedly pathos-laden riff about workplace insecurity. In another pointed exchange, lairy uncle Jimmy (Peter Ferdinando) assures his teenage niece, Fran (Nicole Nettlingham), that he voted for the “good Brexit—the Tony Benn Brexit”. Unimpressed, Fran replies: “Fuck Labour and fuck the Tories, does that make it clearer for you?” It is a feeling shared by Mr Wheatley, who, like the vast swathes of the country now suffering from Brexit burnout, is “developing a third position at the moment, which is ‘disenfranchised and don’t give a fuck’.” “Happy New Year, Colin Burstead” is a reminder of the director’s strengths: he is at his best when combining genre exercises with eccentric British details, evident in films like “Sightseers” (2012) and “Kill List” (2011).  Can it be considered the first great Brexit film? Not quite. For all the firecracker energy of its first half, “Happy New Year, Colin Burstead” never quite transcends the sum of its bickering parts to become a state-of-the-nation drama. Still, for those who plan to spend Christmas pushing sprouts round their plate, studiously avoiding the political elephant in the room, the film is glorious catharsis.