IT HAS been a fairly quiet few months at the Supreme Court. Since early October, the justices have heard 32 oral arguments in mostly tame cases and have issued three decisions, all unanimous. After the partisan rancour of Brett Kavanaugh’s confirmation hearings, the justices—and perhaps especially Chief Justice John Roberts, who strives to keep the court above the political fray—have probably been relieved to keep a low profile. But that may change as 2019 begins. The justices have already accepted three high-profile cases to be heard in the spring. Dept. of Commerce v USDC, up for oral argument on February 19th, embroils the justices in a procedural matter involving litigation over the Trump administration’s proposed citizenship question on the 2020 census; the outcome could shape elections and state funding through 2030. American Legion v American Humanist Association, the court’s first major church-state case in half a decade, is a First Amendment challenge to a cross-shaped war memorial on public ground in Maryland that will be heard on February 27th. In March or April, Kisor v Wilkie will give the justices a chance to draw power away from executive agencies like the Environmental Protection Agency and the National Labour Relations Board. Kisor puts Auer v Robbins—a two-decade-old precedent that agencies should be able to interpret their own regulations when they are ambiguous—in its crosshairs. These cases should prove to be more divisive among the justices than many of the controversies they took up in the autumn. And the justices’ next private conference on January 4th could include a range of hot-button cases that would shove the court further into the limelight. Among the petitions they will consider are two more involving religious liberty. Kennedy v Bremerton School District asks if teachers may overtly practice their religious faith while at a school function; Presbyterian Church in Morristown v Freedom From Religion Foundation examines whether houses of worship can be excluded from government grant programmes. In matters of life and death, the court is discussing whether to take up Shoop v Hill, a capital punishment controversy involving a death-row inmate in Ohio whose IQ is in the 70s. Partisan gerrymandering cases loom from North Carolina and Maryland—matters the court is obliged to review—and could be heard before the justices wrap up oral arguments for the term on April 24th. Several dilemmas would confront the justices should they grant Yovino v Rizo, a case involving the Equal Pay Act of 1963. The main question is whether salary history can justify paying women less than men for similar work. An ancillary matter is whether Judge Stephen Reinhardt, author of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decision vindicating a pay-discrimination claim, may continue to participate in the ruling even though he died shortly before it came down in April 2018. The most highly anticipated petitions awaiting word from the justices involve the contentious matter of equality for gays and lesbians. Bostock v Clayton County, Georgia and Altitude Express, Inc. v Zarda both ask whether the prohibition on sex discrimination in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 should be read to ban discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. In Zarda, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals said it should, standing up for a sky-diving instructor who says he was fired because he is gay. “[S]exual orientation discrimination is a subset of sex discrimination”, the court reasoned, because men who are attracted to men are treated differently from women who are attracted to men. A Seventh Circuit ruling in 2017 (Hively v Ivy Tech Community College) came out the same way. But in Bostock, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that Title VII does not bar LGBT discrimination, denying the claim of Gerald Bostock, a child-advocate employee who was fired soon after he joined a gay softball league. The justices have a third case of this sort to contend with. R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes Inc. v Equal Employment Opportunity Commission tees up another wrinkle in Title VII jurisprudence: whether the bar on sex discrimination extends to discrimination on the basis of gender identity. The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals said it does, telling a funeral home it broke the law when firing Aimee Stephens for presenting herself as a transgender woman. These three petitions have been on the justices’ list for months and have been relisted or rescheduled several times. It seems inevitable that the court will eventually take up one or more of the cases, given the importance of the question—how far a landmark civil-rights law reaches—and the disagreement among the circuit courts. But the understandable reticence of the justices to dive into controversial matters this term may lead them to put off a decision for a few more conferences, pushing oral argument to next autumn or later. There are, moreover, other hot-button questions involving the Trump administration the justices will have to resolve one way or another in the weeks and months to come. Mr Trump’s rollback of DACA, the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals programme, has been blocked by federal courts, as has his ban on transgender soldiers in the military. More recently, Mr Trump’s asylum ban has faced similar resistance in the lower courts. On each of these issues, Mr Trump’s solicitor general, Noel Francisco, has requested extraordinary relief from the justices—often asking them to rule on the matters before the relevant appeals courts have had a chance to weigh in. Mr Trump is betting that the newly minted 5-4 conservative majority—anchored by his two recent picks—will give him a good return on his investment and let him have his way. But it is unclear how receptive the court will be to these unorthodox appeals—especially in the wake of Justice Kavanaugh’s bumpy arrival.