MARKETS may be jittery, but America’s job-creation machine continues to roll on. America’s economy added 155,000 net new jobs in November. Strikingly, the unemployment rate is 3.7%, which is the lowest level in roughly half a century. The last time America enjoyed a similar stretch of low unemployment it was preparing to put men on the moon. How has the American economy managed to achieve such low rates of joblessness? The official rate of unemployment is a ratio of the number of people counted as unemployed to the number considered to be in the labour force, which includes everyone who has a job or wants one. The unemployment rate can wobble for all sorts of reasons. It rose toward 10% during the Great Recession as employers shed staff. Early in the recovery, the unemployment rate began to drop even though hiring remained weak, because workers frustrated by the lack of jobs stopped looking for work and were no longer counted as part of the labour force. The unemployment rate is so low at the moment not only because hiring has been strong, but also because some people who might otherwise be counted as jobless are still not looking for work. Joblessness in America has fallen steadily thanks to the longevity and the sturdiness of the American recovery. America’s stretch of unbroken growth, which began in June of 2009, will become the longest on record in 2019 (assuming it continues). Over most of that time, the economy has consistently added between 2m and 3m jobs per year. Recent tailwinds, like a broadening of global growth and a fiscal stimulus provided by Donald Trump’s tax cut, have spurred the economy. But the patience of the Federal Reserve deserves most credit. Most economists reckon that countries have a “natural” rate of unemployment determined by the flexibility of the labour market, and that when unemployment drops below that rate inflation begins to accelerate upward. But where that natural rate lies is unclear. Several years ago, Fed officials estimated it to be about 5%. But as unemployment approached and dropped below that level, the Fed moved only gradually and slowly to raise interest rates and rein in growth. The fact that inflation has remained low even as unemployment has fallen below 4% suggests they were right to allow the recovery to continue apace. Whether they will do so in future is uncertain, however. Hiring probably cannot continue at the current pace for long without driving the unemployment rate down to levels that are without precedent outside of wartime. The Fed may therefore conclude that it must slow the pace of economic growth to keep inflation from surging. Central banks rarely manage to achieve a meaningful slowdown in growth without triggering a recession—and a rise in the unemployment rate. If America is fortunate it may enjoy an unemployment rate of 3.7% or so for a while longer. It probably will not go much lower, either because job growth is replaced by inflation or, more likely, because the Fed cuts off growth before that can happen.