THERESA MAY’S job is on the line. The British prime minister faces a vote of no confidence in her leadership of the Conservative Party this evening. How do Conservative MPs go about removing their leaders? And if she were to lose, how would they choose her successor? Under the Conservative system, a confidence vote is triggered when 15% of Tory MPs send letters of no confidence to the chair of the 1922 Committee, which represents Conservative MPs in parliament. The party has 316 MPs, so 48 have to write in. After weeks of speculation about a possible leadership challenge, that threshold has now been reached. Mrs May’s decision this week to postpone a parliamentary vote on the Brexit withdrawal deal she has negotiated with the EU appears to have been the catalyst. All Conservative MPs may vote in tonight’s ballot, with the result dictated by a simple majority. If Mrs May wins, she stays on as leader (although in the event of a very narrow victory, she might decide to stand down voluntarily). As an added bonus, another challenge cannot be launched for a year. If Mrs May loses, she would no longer be Conservative leader. Selecting a new leader would then involve two rounds. First, the candidates must win the votes of fellow MPs. The candidates stand against each other in consecutive rounds of votes, with the candidate in last place getting eliminated each time, until only two remain. These two names are then put forward to the estimated 130,000 members of the Conservative Party. They are the happy few who would have a direct say on Britain’s next prime minister. The process can take as long as six weeks, although that timetable would doubtless be speeded up given Britain’s scheduled departure from the EU on March 29th 2019. An accelerated timetable would probably still not be enough to prevent an extension, or even revocation, of Article 50, the exit mechanism that set the clock ticking towards March 29th. And even with a bit of breathing-space, another Conservative prime minister would face exactly the same problems as Mrs May: a divided party, a weak hand in Brussels and a split country.