ON AN early winter morning, with temperatures below –20ºC and a fierce wind whipping off the water, Vasily Sutula, the stern, moustachioed director of a nature reserve on the shores of Lake Baikal, happily surveyed a dozen young volunteers. The youngsters declared the day dubak, slang for a freeze deeper than the standard Russian word for cold, kholod, can convey. Yet they had come to work nonetheless. Coats zipped, they set off for the forest to clear dead trees. The volunteers’ presence is just one small sign of shifting tides in the battle for Baikal, which holds a fifth of the world’s unfrozen fresh water. Environmentalists won a big victory with the closure in 2013 of the Baikal Pulp and Paper Mill (BPPM), a belching behemoth that had dirtied the waters for decades. Yet even as the pollution from the mill has waned, tourist flows have waxed, creating new pressures on an ecosystem that UNESCO warns is “under significant stress”. Encouragingly, veteran activists note that environmental awareness has been steadily rising, especially among younger generations brought up to view the lake as a treasure to be protected. “First of all, we see that it concerns the kids now,” says Mr Sutula, who has headed the reserve for nearly 20 years. Signs of the shifting attitudes can be seen all along the lake. “When we started volunteering in 2009, few understood what it was and why we were doing it,” says Natalia Tugutkhonova of the Great Baikal Trail, the group that organised the outing at the Baikalsky Reserve. Former BPPM employees now help make eco-friendly paper from algae. Even the local chapter of the Black Bears, a Russian bikers’ club, has joined the green campaign, launching patrols along the lake against “piggishness”. To preserve the lake, environmentalists still have their work cut out. The number of tourists visiting Irkutsk Oblast, the main entry point to Baikal, has tripled in the past decade, from some 500,000 to over 1.5m last year. To serve the newcomers, hotels and campgrounds have “popped up like mushrooms after the rain”, says Oleg Timoshkin, a biologist at the Russian Academy of Sciences in Irkutsk. Many lack systems to process the waste they generate, and so dump it into the lake. Nature has also bristled at the influx of outsiders. Specialists reckon that human run-off contributed to the lake’s latest crisis: the sudden and widespread appearance of a new form of algae, spirogyra. Hundreds of tons of the slimy stuff have been infecting the pristine waters and washing up in clumps on the shore. Researchers worry that it may have devastating effects on a delicate ecosystem that is home to over 3,500 plant and animal species. “No one knows where the limit is,” says Sergei Shapkhaev, a local ecologist. “No one knows what kind of immune system Baikal has.”