FOR years, Polish officials have battled to ensure that the phrase “Polish death camps” is not used as a shorthand for Auschwitz and other extermination camps run by the Nazis on Polish territory. Barack Obama did so in a speech in 2012 and was swiftly rebuked by Poland’s foreign minister. Now the government in Warsaw has gone a step further. A bill approved earlier this month introduces a penalty of up to three years’ imprisonment for “whoever accuses, publicly and against the facts, the Polish nation, or the Polish state, of being responsible or complicit in the Nazi crimes committed by the German Third Reich...or any other war crimes, crimes against humanity or crimes against peace”. As Poland’s government continues its argument with the European Union over Poland’s control of the judiciary, its reputation has taken another knock. Six million Polish citizens died during the second world war, 3m of whom were Jews, representing 90% of the country’s Jewish community. The Polish government did not collaborate with the Nazis. But the reaction of the population at large was more mixed. Some Poles sheltered Jews. Poles make up the largest contingent of the “Righteous among the Nations”: non-Jews recognised by Yad Vashem, the Holocaust museum in Jerusalem, for risking their lives for Jews during the Holocaust. But others denounced Jewish neighbours, or did worse, as in the Jedwabne massacre of 1941, when villagers herded hundreds of Jews into a barn and burned them alive. The fate of its Jews remains a hugely sensitive issue in Poland. The new law amends one from 1998 that dealt with ways to commemorate the country’s second-world-war victims and its struggle against occupation, Nazism and communism. Article 55 of that law threatens with imprisonment those who publicly deny Nazi crimes, communist crimes and war crimes against Poles. The new amendment threatens with the same fate those who accuse Poland of complicity in such crimes. President Andrzej Duda, who only sent the law to the constitutional tribunal for consultation after he had signed it, says it guarantees Poland’s “dignity and historical truth”. Without the law, according to right-wing fears, international history could be rewritten to say that Poles ran the extermination camps. Such concerns reflect the nationalist policies of the governing right-wing Law and Justice party (PiS in Polish) that have been widely criticised. Indeed, the law echoes the defiant line taken by the government in its international politicking: nobody in Brussels, Berlin, Washington or Israel can tell Poland what to do. It also seems to chime with PiS’s voters. According to a recent poll, 57% of them support the law, and 68% say it should enter force regardless of international criticism. The bill has been received badly abroad. The prime minister of Israel, Binyamin Netanyahu, slammed it as a “distortion of the truth, rewriting history, and denial of the Holocaust”. Yad Vashem has deemed the new law “problematic”. America has warned that it undermines freedom of speech and historical research. Indeed, with the law’s broad scope and vague wording, it is still hard to foresee how exactly it might be interpreted. It is “designed to falsify history”, says Jan Gross, the author of a book on Jedwabne. Others warn that Warsaw’s efforts will backfire, amplifying historical distortions both in Poland and abroad. Reopened, old wounds may take years to heal.