BACK in 1987, Andre Dawson, a star outfielder in Major League Baseball (MLB), was looking for a change of scenery. After spending a full decade with the Montreal Expos, he was at last a free agent, able to sign with any team he chose. The Expos had finished third-to-last in attendance during the previous season, and their stadium featured an artificial-turf playing surface that aggravated his balky knees. At 31 years old, Mr Dawson surely had at least a few more productive years in him. Nonetheless, not a single club save for his previous employer made him an offer. Still unsigned when spring training began that March, he sent a contract to the Chicago Cubs with a blank space where it specified his salary—inviting the team to pay him however much, or little, the franchise wished. The Cubs wrote in a base salary of $500,000, half the amount Mr Dawson had earned the previous season. He wound up being a remarkable bargain, as he clubbed a career-high 49 home runs in his first season in Chicago and won the National League’s Most Valuable Player award. For the other 24 teams that failed to offer him a contract, it was bad enough that Mr Dawson helped the Cubs beat them on the field. Even worse was that his fruitless job search proved to be a smoking gun helping to prove that the league’s owners had colluded to reduce free agents’ salaries, in violation of MLB’s collective-bargaining agreement (CBA). Encouraged by Peter Ueberroth, then MLB’s commissioner, the clubs informally agreed for three years following the 1985 campaign not to extend offers to players who had toiled for other teams the previous season. The players’ union filed grievances after all three off-seasons. Following Mr Dawson’s saga, the scheme became sufficiently obvious that two different arbitrators ruled against the owners, costing the clubs $434m in damages and poisoning their relations with their employees for years to come. $1m of those payments went to Mr Dawson, in recognition for his meagrely compensated 1987 performance. MLB has enjoyed relatively placid labour relations since 1995, when a devastating players’ strike caused the World Series to be cancelled for the first time since 1904. But a bizarre off-season unfolding during the past few months has led both the players’ union and many outside observers to feel a distinct sense of déjà vu regarding that ill-fated winter of 1986-87. In every year in recent memory, virtually every free agent of consequence has agreed to a deal by the middle of January. But when pitchers and catchers reported to spring training in mid-February, numerous marquee names remained unsigned. The annual “hot-stove league” ritual, a flurry of free-agent signings and trades centred around the owners’ winter meetings in December, seems to have gone cold. Most of the big names have now come off the board, but only after seemingly interminable delays—and in many cases at notable discounts to pricing in previous seasons. Yu Darvish, a star Japanese-Iranian starting pitcher, signed a six-year, $126m deal with the Chicago Cubs on February 10th. That is nearly 20% less than the same club gave to Jon Lester, a similarly talented hurler, three seasons ago. J.D. Martinez, a formidable \slugging outfielder, spent months in talks with the Boston Red Sox, but could not secure an agreement (finally for $110m over five years) until last week. Lorenzo Cain, one of the fastest centre fielders in the game, managed to get a deal done with the Milwaukee Brewers in late January—still quite tardy by historical standards. However, the $80m he will receive over the next five seasons is less than the $90m the Los Angeles Angels gave a full decade ago to Torii Hunter, a similar player at the same position, for the same duration. And Jake Arrieta, who won the Cy Young Award granted to the best pitcher in the National League in 2015, is still languishing on the market. He will have to show up late for spring training to whichever team winds up signing him. Overall, only 12 free agents have secured agreements of three years or longer; last year’s figure was 27. So far, the players’ union and agents have refrained from deploying the “C” word—collusion, that is—publicly. And there are compelling, benign explanations for baseball’s most extreme buyer’s market in a generation. The most immediate cause is that the Major League Baseball Players’ Association (MLBPA), long regarded as America’s most successful union in any industry, seems to have been fleeced in the league’s most recent CBA. Under the stewardship of Marvin Miller, the MLBPA prioritised the preservation of an open market for free agents above virtually every other concern. The union went on strike in 1994 to prevent the imposition of a salary cap. But Tony Clark, the first former player to lead the MLBPA, seems to have adopted a less confrontational approach during the 2016 round of CBA negotiations. The current deal, which runs through 2021, beefed up the “luxury tax” levied on teams whose salary bills repeatedly exceed a threshold. It also penalises offending franchises’ future product on the field, by moving down their picks in the league’s annual draft of amateur players and reducing the total amount they can pay in signing bonuses to international free agents. That created a strong incentive for rich clubs—principally the New York Yankees and Los Angeles Dodgers—to trim their payrolls for one year, in order to reset their tax rate. (The Yankees did increase their spending by trading for Giancarlo Stanton, whose $325m contract is the biggest in this history of professional sports, but that was of little help to the 2017-18 free-agent class.) In exchange for such salary restraints, which would probably leave Miller turning in his grave, the union extracted modest concessions on players’ pensions and medical care, as well as amenities like clubhouse chefs. “It was like they didn’t care about money anymore,” one MLB official recently told Yahoo Sports. Rob Manfred, MLB’s commissioner, was succinct when asked on February 23rd about the glacial free-agent market: the owners’ chief negotiator, he said, had “made a good deal”. Another probable cause is the widespread adoption of quantitative analytics across the league’s front offices. Ever-more teams are now seeking to imitate the bust-and-boom cycle of the past two champions—the Houston Astros and Chicago Cubs, who both subjected their fans to three brutal rebuilding years while they stockpiled young talent before turning on the spending spigot. As a result, the number of owners willing to open up their wallets has mostly shrunk to the handful of teams who are legitimate title contenders. Similarly, general managers are by now all too aware of the grim financial return that big-dollar free agents, who tend to receive their paydays shortly before beginning the decline phases of their careers, have delivered in the past. With a handful of remaining exceptions—with the eight-year, $144m pact the San Diego Padres signed with Eric Hosmer, a good-not-great first baseman, on February 17th serving as Exhibit A—the ranks of clubs willing to sign contracts that will pay players as stars all the way up to their expected retirement have dwindled to nil. And even at what appear to be reduced rates, many of today’s buyers may still come to rue their recent deals. Mr Martinez, in particular, was a late bloomer and is a one-dimensional, brittle power hitter, the textbook archetype for a player likely to age poorly. The one voice who has been willing to hurl baseball’s most toxic accusation, more or less, is perhaps to be expected: Scott Boras, the sport’s long-tenured super-agent. Mr Boras negotiated baseball’s first $100m deal, as well as a slew of other record-breaking contracts. He is notorious for holding out until the last possible moment, demanding outlandish sums for the players he represents and rarely blinking first. He represented many of the late-signing stars, who might have been willing to cut their losses earlier had he not steeled them to remain patient. But even the famously persuasive Mr Boras will have a hard time convincing the public—not to mention an arbitrator, if the union does file a grievance—that Mr Martinez’s lengthy wait before inking a $110m contract is in any way comparable to Mr Dawson’s odyssey. Sometimes, a market correction is just a market correction. Any murmurs of collusion are likely to be put on hold next winter, whose stacked free-agent class could include four of the top ten players in the game, two of them (Bryce Harper and Manny Machado) young enough to perform near their peak level over a seven- or eight-year deal. Nonetheless, going forward, it is next year’s expected spending bonanza, not this year’s deep freeze, that is likely to look like an aberration. For decades, MLB has relied on a certain measure of systematic irrationality to preserve the peace between its players and owners: in exchange for minimising restrictions on the market once players reach free agency, the union has accepted rules that keeps its members grossly underpaid when they are young. As long as the winner’s curse ensured that at least one team would always pay an ageing star far more than his expected value, this arrangement worked as a de facto cross-subsidy from younger union members to older ones. However, nothing in the CBA requires teams to overpay veteran free agents. Now that clubs seem to have wised up, the players’ share of overall league revenues has tumbled. The players can certainly endure another year or two of hot-stove doldrums. But come 2021, the union will probably demand the most fundamental reforms to baseball’s economic system since the deal that ended the 1994 strike. Now that clubs can no longer be expected to overpay veterans, more money will need to be routed to young stars in order for the players as a group to regain their historical share of MLB’s revenues. Under the current rules, players are tied to the team that drafts them until they complete six full seasons in MLB—a period that crafty teams have effectively stretched to seven years of control, by calling up top prospects from the minors a few weeks into the season. For their first three or four seasons, players must accept whatever salary their employer chooses to offer them—usually a figure near the league minimum of $545,000, even as some of them generate tens of millions of dollars’ worth of on-field value. For the three years after that, if the player and his team cannot agree on a contract, both sides submit proposed figures to an arbitrator, who chooses one of them. Only then can a player test his worth on the open market. This system could be easily tweaked to increase young players’ share, either by starting arbitration earlier (possibly after a player’s first season), shortening teams’ overall period of control, or both. An even more radical change would be to abolish the amateur draft entirely, and make all players free agents from the start. Any move in this direction, however, would make it harder for small-market teams to acquire and retain talent, potentially undermining the tenuous competitive balance between rich and poor clubs. As a result, they would need to be paired with vastly expanded revenue sharing between teams. In turn, that reform carries the risk of diluting wealthy franchises’ incentive to maximise their turnover—a team that has to send 90% of its ticket sales into a central pool has little reason to bother trying to fill its stadium with fans. To avoid this peril, transfers between teams would need to take the form of lump sums, rather than percentages of wealthy franchises’ turnover. In the past, big-market clubs like the New York Yankees, Los Angeles Dodgers and Chicago Cubs have accepted revenue sharing as part of a system that depressed free-agent salaries in general. But getting them to accept a fixed-transfer model would be a very big ask. The other path would be for the MLBPA to follow in the footsteps of its fellow unions in the National Basketball Association, National Football League and National Hockey League. In those sports, teams have both a floor and a ceiling on their payrolls, and players are guaranteed a fixed percentage of the league’s revenues. Accepting such a model would be a bitter pill for the union, which has essentially treated maintaining an unfettered free-agent market as its raison d’etre for decades. But after serving the players so well for so long, the free market may at last have turned against them.