WITH a brief order on February 26th, the Supreme Court dealt a blow to Donald Trump’s plans to rescind Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA. The justices, without elaboration or dissent, refused to expedite Mr Trump’s appeal of a lower-court decision stopping him from winding down the programme, which protects some 700,000 undocumented immigrants from deportation and gives them permission to work. The government had asked the Supreme Court to hear its appeal before the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeal had weighed in—an extraordinary request typically granted only in the midst of national emergency. It seems that Mr Trump’s lawyers overreached: the justices effectively told the administration to stand down and get back in line. They will consider acting only after the case wends its way to them on the prescribed appellate path. When Jeff Sessions, the attorney-general, announced on September 5th that the programme was illegal and would be ended, a phase-out was established. DACA recipients would have until October 5th 2017 to renew expiring two-year deferrals, but after March 5th 2018, DACA beneficiaries who had not met that deadline—upwards of 20,000—would be subject to deportation as soon as their term expired. In January and February, federal judges in San Francisco and New York each blocked Mr Trump from killing DACA on March 5th. While neither judge ordered the government to accept new applicants for the programme, both said that it must keep processing renewals indefinitely, until the lawsuits challenging the rescission were concluded. These rulings prompted an outcry from the administration. Sarah Sanders, Mr Trump’s press secretary, said Judge William Alsup’s nationwide injunction (issued from California) was “outrageous”; the president took to Twitter to complain that America’s courts were “broken and unfair”. Days later, Mr Trump’s lawyers made their audacious request to leapfrog the Ninth Circuit and have their appeal heard by America’s top court. They were perhaps even more annoyed by Judge Nicholas Garaufis’s order (in Brooklyn) on February 13th. In addition to its technical analysis of the rescission’s administrative-law troubles, Judge Garaufis’s opinion took notice of Mr Trump’s anti-immigrant tweets. Earlier he had criticised the president’s “anti-Latino commentary” as “recurrent” and “vicious”. Mr Trump was quick to express anger that the Supreme Court has shunted his appeal back to the Ninth Circuit, which has twice blocked his executive orders banning travel from Muslim countries. “Nothing is as bad as the Ninth Circuit”, Mr Trump said at a White House gathering of governors on February 26th, echoing previous Twitter attacks on his least-favourite federal circuit. “The Supreme Court just ruled it has to go through the normal channels”, the president noted, “so it’s going back in and there won’t be any surprise”. He elaborated on that. “It’s really sad when every single case filed against us is in the Ninth Circuit. We lose. We lose. We lose. And then we do fine in our Supreme Court,” he said, somewhat inaccurately, as the justices have yet to issue a definitive ruling on any of his challenged policies. “What does that tell you about our court system? It’s a very, very sad thing”. DACA beneficiaries are unlikely to agree. With the twin injunctions in place, Mr Trump is, for the time being, compelled to keep issuing renewals to people who qualify. Though the Supreme Court noted its expectation that the Ninth Circuit would consider the case “expeditiously”, a decision is not expected any time soon. After briefing and oral argument, the appeals court probably won’t issue a decision until the summer. If Mr Trump’s prediction of another loss there proves accurate, it does not matter how the Second Circuit handles Judge Garaufis’s ruling on the other coast: one injunction is enough to keep DACA’s demise at bay. The next step will probably be another appeal to the Supreme Court, which the justices probably would not act on until the autumn. This means DACA will remain in place until the end of 2018 or a few months into 2019, as the justices mull the case on the merits. That gives Congress more time to find a legislative fix for DACA—and gives the Dreamers it protects a little more breathing room as the legal saga over their status in America continues to unfold.