What Are We Doing Here? By Marilynne Robinson. Farrar, Straus and Giroux; 336 pages; $17.70. Virago; £18.99 MARILYNNE ROBINSON’s new collection of essays is the literary equivalent of Sachertorte: so rich that it is best consumed one small slice at a time. In “What Are We Doing Here?” the American novelist intermingles philosophy, theology, history, science, aesthetics, politics and economics. Indeed, such is her breadth of reading that it is a wonder she finds time to write her novels, which reflect many of her concerns as a practising Christian. (The Pulitzer-prizewinning “Gilead”—part of a trilogy focused on the family of a Congregationalist minister, the Reverend John Ames—is probably the best-known.) The new book’s one disappointment, indeed, is that she gives little space to the art of fiction. Her preface is a diatribe against the poverty of intellectual debate in America, and anyone wedded unquestioningly to a creed—whether Marxism, capitalism, Freudianism or Christianity—will read this book with discomfort. Thought, she complains, has been surrendered to ideology: left and right “share false assumptions and flawed conclusions that are never effectively examined because they are indeed shared”. Capitalism is a case in point. Even those on America’s left tend to see it as an indigenous system, whereas in fact it was imported from Britain; and while Ms Robinson acknowledges the great wealth that capitalism has created, she argues that this foundational story has legitimised the neglect of the poor, since their protection is not seen as one of the nation’s core values. The teaching of the humanities—the subject of the title essay—is of particular concern to her. Ms Robinson castigates those who see education simply as a means of training workers for the economy, and cites Alexis de Tocqueville’s argument that the fostering of “poetry, eloquence, wit, imagination, depth of thought” is the lifeblood of democracy. She takes issue above all with anyone who seeks to diminish humankind’s “natural grandeur” and capacity for excellence. Included in this category are all deterministic schools of thought, from Freudianism and Marxism to neo-Darwinism. Bertrand Russell is a particular bête noir, as is Richard Dawkins. What they all have in common, she argues, is the desire to “minimise radically everything human” about human nature—and deny anything divine. She sees a tendency “to raise questions about the origins and even the reality of human selfhood. Specifically they challenge the moral self, that old wanderer through the trials and temptations of earthly life. Considering how they differ in their premises, it is striking how consistently they exclude personal agency, how deterministic they are. Yet we all experience the reality of moral choice continuously.” She considers it a mistake to believe that science has replaced faith as “an equivalent framing of reality”, for great as the achievements of science are, it offers only a partial explanation of the universe. Its theories gain acceptance only to be superseded by others; concepts such as justice, wisdom and beauty have no place in science, yet everyone recognises them and the enormous impact they have on our world. Christian theology, by contrast, supports “an ultimate coherency that can embrace equally the true, the tentative, and the flawed”. Science, she believes, should not presume to dismiss what it cannot emulate. But Ms Robinson has no time for America’s Christian right, which has “made religious language toxic”. On the other hand, she is at pains to rehabilitate the 17th-century Puritans who, despite their crucial role in shaping America, are remembered chiefly as the ghastly zealots of “The Crucible” and “The Scarlet Letter”. They were not, she maintains, any crueller than their European contemporaries, and the Cromwellian spirit of rebellion they brought with them sowed the seeds of the country’s independence. Their leading theologian, Jonathan Edwards, for whom “the sense of beauty is the profoundest experience of consciousness,” is a particular inspiration to her. To describe these pieces as “essays” is somewhat misleading. Many are the texts of lectures, which means that—presumably for reasons of time—they do not always contain the backing one would like to support specific points. There is also an element of overlap and repetition which might have been avoided if the book had been written from scratch. Nevertheless, this is a magnificently eloquent and stimulating work.