THE mugshot taken of Eric Greitens after he was taken into custody on February 22nd is not flattering. The usually photogenic Republican governor of Missouri looks drawn, his jaw grimly set. A grand jury in St Louis had just indicted him on a charge of invasion of privacy. If convicted of the felony of which he is accused, the governor will almost certainly lose his job. The indictment relates to an extramarital affair that Mr Greitens had in 2015 with a hairdresser in St Louis. The married father of two boys admits to the affair, but firmly rejects an allegation that he threatened to blackmail his lover by taking a compromising photograph of her while she was blindfolded in his basement. The indictment states otherwise. “The defendant knowingly photographed [the victim] in a state of full or partial nudity without the knowledge and consent of [the victim] and in a place where a person would have a reasonable expectation of privacy,” says the indictment. “The defendant subsequently transmitted the image contained in the photograph in a manner that allowed access to that image via a computer.” Mr Greitens continues to insist on his innocence. After his release from custody, he did so on Facebook, one of his favourite channels of communication. “As I have said before, I made a personal mistake before I was Governor. I did not commit a crime. With today’s disappointing and misguided political decision, my confidence in our prosecutorial system is shaken, but not broken. I know this will be righted soon. The people of Missouri deserve better than a reckless liberal prosecutor who uses her office to score political points”. Once a rising star in the Republican Party, Mr Greitens will be extremely lucky if he is able run for re-election in 2020. The political novice, who was born and raised in Missouri, has a CV straight out of central casting for a Republican leader. The former navy SEAL majored in ethics a Duke University, before he was selected for a Rhodes scholarship at Oxford University. While in the navy he won a Bronze Star and a Purple Heart, both decorations for heroic achievement. When he decided to enter politics, he went straight for the governorship. His election in 2016 was a surprise to many in the political establishment of the Show-Me state. As soon as he got the top job Mr Greitens began to ruffle feathers, including those of Republican lawmakers, with his tirades against the “culture of corruption” in Jefferson City and his open ambition to run for national office. As a result, his allies are rather few in the state capital. Several Republican lawmakers, such as Nate Walker, who was an early supporter of Mr Greitens, have called for his resignation. Top legislative Republicans, including Todd Richardson, the speaker of the House, said in a joint statement that they will appoint a group of legislators to investigate the charges against the governor. “We will carefully examine the facts contained in the indictment and answer the question as to whether or not the governor can lead our state while a felony case moves forward." Any impeachment proceedings would begin in the House. Mr Greitens is scheduled to appear in court on March 16th.  He is skipping this weekend’s National Governors Association meetings in Washington, DC and will also step down from his post on the executive committee of the Republican Governors Association (he is one of seven Republican governors on the committee). In a sign of Mr Greitens’ desperation to hold on to his job, the governor’s lawyers contacted the circuit attorney to arrange a secret meeting next week to share the “human” side of the story. The circuit attorney responded that without additional facts and information from the governor such a meeting was not necessary. It is a shockingly low point in a career that showed much promise.