AMERICA is living through strange times when the headline “duelling committee memos released” can make partisans sit up and roar. These are those time, alas. There has been much roaring since the late-night release over the weekend of a memorandum written by Democratic members of the House of Representatives Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI), rebutting an earlier document written by that body’s Republican leaders. The release of the Democratic rebuttal was a surprise. Publication had already been delayed for two weeks by the White House, ostensibly because President Donald Trump was concerned that his opponents had been careless about revealing intelligence sources. That is a worthy concern, though slightly at odds with Mr Trump’s decision to release the initial Republican memo before reading it despite public pleas from the FBI and Department of Justice that it risked giving away secrets. In more normal times, the contents of the memos themselves might seem a trifle esoteric for a partisan slugging-match. The core charge of the Republican memo, written by staff working for the HPSCI chairman, Representative Devin Nunes of California, is that the Department of Justice and the FBI improperly secured a warrant to spy on Carter Page, a former foreign policy adviser to the Trump campaign with long-standing business interests in Russia, in so far as they had failed to tell an oversight court that evidence against Mr Page came from a dossier commissioned and paid for by the Democratic Party and Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign. Furthermore, the Nunes memo, as it is known, waxed indignant about the alleged bias of the former British intelligence officer who wrote that dossier, Christopher Steele. The evidence for that “bias” is that Mr Steele grew increasingly anxious about the prospect of a Trump presidency as he worked his Russian sources and heard tales (some of them lurid and uncorroborated) about how Russians might think they had compromising information on the property tycoon. To keep things simple, the Nunes memo charged American spooks with failing to tell the oversight court, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, that the Steele dossier was paid for by the Democrats, though that dossier was “an essential part” of the application for a surveillance warrant against Mr Page granted in October 2016 and renewed three times thereafter. That fits the Trumpian narrative, stoked for months by the president and his supporters, that the broader probe into Russian election-meddling in 2016 by the special counsel, Robert Mueller, is a partisan witch-hunt. Again to keep things simple, the Democratic rebuttal pushes back at the idea that judges were not warned that evidence from the Steele dossier had been gathered for political reasons. Yes, say the Democrats, it is true that the names of Mr Steele and of the Americans who hired him were redacted in the warrant application and replaced with such tags as “Source #1” and “U.S. Person”. But, say the Democrats, the judges were told everything else that they needed to know, and in any case the warrant application “made only narrow use of information from Steele’s sources about Page’s specific activities in 2016”. The Democratic rebuttal quotes from the original warrant application, which said that Mr Steele:  What is more, the Democrats retort, it is a bit rich for Republicans to grumble that the names of Americans were not revealed to the intelligence oversight court. Not that long ago, Mr Nunes, a vocal Trump ally, made the alleged “unmasking” of Americans by Democrats and the intelligence community Exhibit A for his theory that the late Obama administration was a lawless dystopia, in which agents of a deep state schemed against Mr Trump. Finally, the Democrats charge, even if the Steele dossier helped tip the oversight court into granting a warrant to spy on Mr Page, the FBI had been anxiously monitoring the businessman’s contacts with Russians for months, and had indeed interviewed him “multiple times” before the FBI became aware of the Steele dossier in September 2016. Because this is 2018 and the world is quite strange, the Republican majority on the HSCI have now actually put out a rebuttal to the Democrats’ rebuttal of their chairman’s memo. This rebuttal-rebuttal grumbles that if the evidence against Mr Page was so strong, the Democrats and the FBI would surely not have needed the Steele dossier. It further grumbles that the FBI and Democrats both “omit that, in a secretly-taped statement reproduced in a 2015 federal court filing, a Russian intelligence officer called Page ‘an idiot’.” That is indeed an interesting detail, though arguably unhelpful in explaining why Mr Trump named Mr Page as a foreign-policy aide to his campaign in March 2016. If non-partisans, on reading these duelling memos, despair at the sense of confusion creeping over them like a fog, they should not be surprised. For such memos are not intended to elucidate. The sad reality is that almost nothing anyone reveals about the various probes into Russian election-meddling is likely to change a single partisan mind. These memos may be written in the sober, footnoted style of legal submissions. But it is more helpful to think of them as toots on a bugle in the midst of a cacophonous battle. They are calls to arms, designed to rally the troops on each side, reassure them that they are winning and keep them in line amid the clanging, banging and horse-whinnying of combat. Mr Trump understands that well. Over the weekend he used his favourite bugle, Twitter, to tell his followers exactly how to understand the Democratic rebuttal memo. The Democratic memo, he tootled-tweeted: “is a total political and legal BUST.” He went on that it “just confirms all of the terrible things that were done. SO ILLEGAL!” A scholar of the historical record is allowed to frown at this point, wondering just which of the Democrats’ and the FBI’s actions strike Mr Trump as being so terrible. True, Republican supporters of the president have been queuing to denounce the Democrats and the FBI for such wicked acts as relying on a dossier born of political opposition research. They have also attacked Mr Steele for obtaining information from Russian sources. But no less an authority than Mr Trump is on the record as cheering the idea that using opposition research and dodgy Russian information can be a public service, if that is what it takes to expose skulduggery in high places. Take Mr Trump’s statements in July 2016, after Russia had been accused by American spy chiefs of hacking Democratic National Committee e-mails. “I will tell you this, Russia: if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 e-mails that are missing,” Mr Trump told reporters in Florida, referring to e-mails deleted from a private server used by Mrs Clinton when she was secretary of state. Mr Trump doubled down on Twitter later that same day, saying: “If Russia or any other country or person has Hillary Clinton’s 33,000 illegally deleted emails, perhaps they should share them with the FBI!” Then there is the question of opposition research. In July 2017, when Donald Trump junior was in the spotlight for accepting a meeting during the election campaign with Russians who he believed had dirt on Mrs Clinton, the president defended his son without hesitation. “It’s called opposition research, or even research into your opponent,” Mr Trump said at a joint news conference with the French President, Emmanuel Macron. “Politics is not the nicest business in the world, but it’s very standard where they have information and you take the information.” The key to the mystery is to understand that these duelling memos are not about what was done by anyone. This is a political moment in which “what” matters less than “who”—who someone is for, and against. For Republicans, the real crime is that the FBI employed senior officials who said to colleagues in text messages or e-mails that they hated the idea of a Trump presidency, and worked with Trump opponents. Mr Steele is accused of being desperate to stop Mr Trump from being elected, as proof of his “bias”. Others might say that if Mr Steele really thought he had evidence that the Russians had kompromat on the Republican nominee for president, it was his duty to be alarmed. Not long ago, of course, lots of Americans believed that individuals could have personal political beliefs and still serve the rule of law. If the duelling memos clarify anything, it is that that moment is long past.