THE months leading up to the Anglo-American assault on Saddam Hussein in 2003 produced some tense moments in diplomacy of the religious, as well as the secular, sort. To the dismay of American conservatives, especially Catholic ones, the ailing Pope John Paul II was unequivocal in his opposition to any recourse to war. By one count, the pontiff made this point at least 56 times. Among those leading the Vatican’s diplomatic charge was a French prelate, then styled as Archbishop Jean-Louis Tauran, the holy see’s secretary for relations with states. At one point, he told 174 foreign envoys accredited to the Vatican that “a war of aggression would be a crime against peace.” Since Iraq had not (at least since the 1991 ceasefire) perpetrated an armed attack against anyone, any invasion of that country by one or more states would amount in legal and moral terms to a campaign of aggression, the archbishop added. The use of force should only be a last resort, undertaken in strict conformity with the rules of the United Nations; and it was absolutely clear, in the French cleric’s view, that the circumstances permitting a recourse to armed force (against Iraq) did not exist. The Bush administration despatched a respected Catholic philosopher, Michael Novak, to Rome to argue the case for the legitimacy of “preventive war” against a dangerous pariah state. But people at the Vatican, including the Frenchman who led its diplomatic branch, remained utterly unconvinced. On July 5th Cardinal Tauran died aged 75. He won posthumous praise (and in some quarters posthumous criticism) for both the big jobs he had done. Between 1990 and 2003 he served as Vatican “foreign minister”, and in 2007 he assumed the leadership of the Pontifical Council for Inter-religious Dialogue, a duty he continued to shoulder despite being stricken with Parkinson’s disease throughout his tenure. In the second job, his most delicate task was to manage the Vatican’s relations with the world of Islam. He was seemingly indefatigable. In April he led a Vatican delegation to Saudi Arabia, and the following month he marked the start of Ramadan by declaring that Christianity and Islam must move from “a spirit of competition to one of collaboration”. Although it was proper to recognise the differences between the two religions, it was also important for Christians and Muslims to remember the religious and moral values they shared. The two parts of his career were in fact closely linked. As will be recalled by anyone who was around the Vatican in the Gulf war period, the holy see’s opposition to the Iraq war was motivated not only by general principles; it also reflected a feeling that Christians in Iraq and the surrounding region would be doomed if the idea took hold that there was a binary opposition between the historically Christian West and the historically Muslim Middle East. Muslims who were enraged by America’s intervention in their region would surely take their revenge on the people in their own neighbourhood who practised a “Western” religion, in other words Christians. From this point of view, it was worthwhile for the Vatican to denounce the Iraq war even if there was little hope of its words being heeded in Washington, DC. Whether successful or not, strong words from the holy see would help to dispel the impressiont that the entire Christian West was lining up to impose its will on the lands where Islam prevailed. Unfortunately the Vatican’s fears proved to be well-founded. In Iraq, for example, the number of Christians has fallen to under 300,000 (and maybe much fewer) from 1.3m before the 2003 war. Cynics would say the sort of emollient language that Cardinal Tauran used when addressing Islam did little to protect vulnerable Christian minorities. He would probably have retorted that those minoritites would not now be so vulnerable if it had not been for the heavy-handed actions of the West. On July 7th Pope Francis convened a meeting in the Italian port of Bari for Christian leaders with flocks in the Middle East and urged them to overcome their quarrels and doctrinal differences to work together for the welfare and survival of their embattled communities. Whatever the causes , a battle for survival is probably an accurate description. And at least one French bishop felt so strongly about that battle that he continued the struggle even when he was fighting a losing war against ill health.