FOR A century Maxwell Street was the “gateway neighbourhood” of Chicago. Irish and German immigrants arrived in 1848 to build railroads; Italians, Greeks, Russians, Bohemians and Mexicans moved in shortly after. By the late 19th century Eastern European Jewish migrants had established a ghetto street bazaar, famed as the largest open-air market in America. Blues musicians who escaped the segregated South in the 1930s came to Maxwell Street for the market’s large audience. So large and loud, in fact, that they needed amplifiers and electrical instruments to cut through the din of hawkers. “Chicago blues” was born. The electric guitars and harmonicas favoured by Chicago bluesmen such as Muddy Waters, Howlin’ Wolf and Jimmy Reed made for a new sound, one that proved commercially potent. Three thousand copies of Waters’ single “I Can’t Be Satisfied” (1948)—with its blend of Delta Blues and electric slide guitar—were sold in a day. Little Walter and B.B. King frequently topped the rhythm-and-blues chart. When the University of Illinois at Chicago expanded in the 1990s, it bought land in the Maxwell area and eventually demolished the market. That tore the heart out of Chicago blues, and destroyed a crucial bit of the city’s cultural capital. The intersection of Halsted Street and Maxwell hosted its last performances around 2000. In 2008 the city created a facsimile of the market north-east of its original location, but the tacos and churros offered at food stalls are the big draw, not the music. The network of smaller clubs clustered around 47th Street is gone, too. Jazz Record Mart, once considered the world’s largest jazz and blues record store, closed in 2016 due to high rents. Somewhat incredibly, there is no official blues museum in Chicago. The former Chess Records headquarters, where classics such as “Mannish Boy” and “At Last” were recorded, offers tours of its bare studios and memorabilia; but it is still a footnote in city guides. The vibrant music that once dominated the city feels barely audible: the spotlight has moved onto hip-hop, with Chicagoans such as Kanye West, Chance the Rapper and Kid Cudi among the most prominent performers. Yet the blues could easily be one of Chicago’s cultural calling cards. The annual Chicago Blues Fest—the world’s largest free blues event—expanded its hours in 2018 and broadened its reach beyond tribute acts. It now welcomes regional blues and African desert blues, and should attract a wider range of fans. A handful of blues clubs persevere, and there is some demand for the live music nightlife typical of the 1940s. George “Buddy” Guy, a guitarist, singer and ambassador of urban blues, owns a tourist-friendly venue in walking distance from this city’s downtown hotels and business district. Mr Guy takes to the stage every January for a residency, selling out 16 shows. Yet Chicago needs to do more to highlight its past as one of the great blues cities. “Amplified: Chicago Blues”, an exhibition at the History museum, hits the right note (it is another success for Joy Bivins, the museum’s curatorial director). Anchored by dozens of intimate photographs taken by Raeburn “Ray” Flerlage of legendary artists (pictured above), the exhibit puts 20th-century Chicago blues in the context of the Great Migration, and maps the locations of the key venues, performances and musicians’ residences. It is fun and accessible, too: visitors can strum electric guitars, learn chord progressions, remix songs in a studio or sing karaoke to “Got My Mojo Working” (popularised by Waters) or “Wang Dang Doodle” (a hit for Koko Taylor). As the exhibition makes clear, music helped Southern black migrants “forge connections and transform an unfamiliar, often inhospitable city into a new home”. The show also underscores the possibilities for a heritage space dedicated to the blues—one that is as dynamic and entertaining as the music itself, and takes a contrapuntal approach to Chicago’s place in modern American history.