UNTIL his death in 1953, Douglas Southall Freeman, a historian and writer who venerated the Old South, would tip his hat to Robert E. Lee when driving past the towering statue of the Confederate general on Richmond’s Monument Avenue. Douglas Wilder, America's first elected black governor and a Richmond native, said it was understood among the city’s African-Americans that Monument Avenue, a gracious boulevard flanked by mansions, was a white shrine, a place to be avoided—and not just because of segregation. Such are the contradictory customs of Richmond, capital of the Confederacy for most of the American civil war. Today, the city is engaged in a surprisingly civil city-wide argument over whether to take down the statues of Lee and four other prominent rebels on Monument Avenue. For some, this would amount to sacrilege. Others say it would be a white-wash of history. Still others want the statues removed as hurtful symbols of white supremacy. And there is a legal complexity: state laws recently affirmed by the legislature’s Republican majority prohibit the removal of Confederate monuments. Meanwhile, there are white Richmonders who insist the only place for the monuments is the scrapheap. And there are African-American residents who say the monuments should remain as reminders that long-dead white oligarchs could not thwart black progress. All of this is a reminder of the complexity of Southern history. The civil war and its aftermath remain defining moments for a region that is now more suburban than rural, and increasingly defined by some progressive big cities. Richmond, with its red-brick, mock Georgian houses, ancient oak and magnolia, and often beautifully mannered residents, has a bitter history largely shaped by the civil war and its chief cause: the South’s attempt to perpetuate slavery. But in the 21st century, with its young African-American mayor, multi-hued populace and youthful vibe, the city is making a lurch from a rigidly exclusionary past toward a more inclusive future. Confederate iconography—should it stay or should it go?—has become the principal flashpoint of this sometimes difficult transition. This has played out in other Southern cities, including Memphis and New Orleans, both of which have pulled down Confederate monuments. In June 2017, Richmond created a commission of historians and community activists to recommend a plan for the Confederate statues on Monument Avenue. The commission did not consider the roughly half-dozen others scattered across the city. This month, after taking testimony in public and by e-mail, the 11-member, biracial commission appointed by Mayor Levar Stoney put forward its carefully drawn up recommendations. The exercise stood in dramatic contrast to the way such a debate played out in Charlottesville, the college town 70 miles to the west. There, nearly a year ago, street fights erupted between white nationalists and counter-protestors over a proposal to remove a statue of Lee. A counter-protestor was killed. Richmond’s commission said the city should remove a likeness of the Confederacy’s president, Jefferson Davis—he wasn’t a Virginian and his monument, more than the others, glorifies the Southern revolt. It recommended preserving the four statues of the Virginia-born figures: Lee, J.E.B. Stuart, Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson and Matthew Fontaine Maury, a naval officer and pioneering oceanographer. But it also recommended that the city should erect signage that make clear the history of the statues. They should explain, for example, that they went up in the late 1800s and early 1900s to signify the restoration of white political hegemony and its troubling, post-civil war manifestation: a new form of enslavement for Southern blacks, such as their loss of voting and civil rights. In effect, the commission argued that Monument Avenue, already a national and state historic district, should function as an open-air museum, with its artefacts—bronze statues atop plinths of marble and granite—fully explained. It also recommended that more statues be erected as tributes to more recent heroes, including women and minorities. A small step was taken in that direction in 1996, when a statue of Arthur Ashe, a Richmond-born African-American tennis champion went up on a leafy stretch of Monument Avenue, just beyond the Maury monument. On the day that it was dedicated, a throng of white Southern-heritage devotees gathered in protest, arguing that Monument Avenue should be reserved for white, male, Protestant military leaders of a bloody sectional rebellion more than 150 years ago. Even in the New South, Old South attitudes endure.