MARTHA and the Vandellas knew exactly how to describe a heat wave when they released their hit of the same name in 1963. It involved an inability to stop crying, the feeling of being possessed by the devil, high blood pressure, and a tell-tale “burning in my heart”. Their definition is a model of precision compared with the one provided by the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), the UN agency that calls itself “the authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the world’s atmosphere”. A heat wave, it says, is a “marked warming of the air, or the invasion of very warm air, over a large area; it usually lasts from a few days to a few weeks”. That sounds downright pleasant to residents of cooler climes and does not capture the lethal menace of a weather phenomenon that killed tens of thousands in Russia in 2010 and in western Europe in 2003. Is there not something more precise? Governments have been late to the game when it comes to establishing exact criteria for heat waves and public heat-warning systems. They have been more active since 2003, when stories about elderly people in France dying alone while their families were on holiday fed public outrage. And they have also responded to the increased frequency of periods of extreme heat in recent years. Yet a survey by the WMO in 2015 found that around one-third of countries still lacked criteria for defining and reacting to heat waves. More worrying for researchers trying to get a global grasp on the problem, there is no commonly accepted definition for the point at which the public should be alerted. Some differences are logical because heat-wave warnings depend in part on what residents are used to. The temperatures currently keeping Londoners sweating on the Underground would not warrant a mention in Furnace Creek, California, which has recorded the world’s highest temperature (56.7°C, or 134°F, in 1913). It makes sense to tailor warnings to local conditions. Environment Canada, a government department, warns residents of Prince Edward Island when the temperature will reach 27°C, but sets a threshold of 35°C for the arid interior of south-eastern British Columbia. But maximum temperature is only one of a number of variables that can add up to a killer heat wave. Others include humidity, air pollution, wind conditions, the minimum night-time temperature and how long the hot spell lasts. National definitions vary widely on which of these variables are included, how they are measured, and even on the timing of warnings. An alert in England means the heat wave is expected within three days. In Belgium, it means the hot weather has already arrived. This matters less to local residents and public-health authorities who know from past experience what to expect and how to prepare when an alert is issued. But it makes it difficult for researchers to paint a global picture and for policymakers to learn from best practice in other areas experiencing similar conditions. The WMO is encouraging climate and health scientists to develop a measure that could be used more widely in forecasts and warnings. Many are in development, including a universal thermal climate index, which combines air temperature with measures of its effect on the human body. But for now, the answer to what is a heat wave is that it depends on where you are.