LONDON’S top universities are underperforming, in terms of student satisfaction at least. The International Student Barometer, which measures the views of students around the world studying outside their home country, finds that international students in London would be significantly less likely to recommend their university than would those in Britain’s other cities. That is, no doubt, in part the consequence of their location, for big cities tend to be unfriendly and pricey. Yet New York’s top universities compare better with their compatriots than London’s do with theirs. Indeed, Columbia, one of America’s best, also has one of its highest student ratings. So what’s the problem in London? In part, it is the teaching. Imperial is the only one of London’s top universities to get a gold award in the government’s Teaching Excellence Framework; the London School of Economics (LSE) got a bronze, the lowest level of award. And poor teaching may be related to the high performance of some London universities in other rankings. It is research excellence that wins an institution a top spot in the three global rankings that matter—Times Higher Education, QS and Shanghai—and a focus on research sometimes comes at the expense of teaching. Social factors are at work, too. Creating a feeling of community is particularly hard for London’s universities, some of which suffer from the lack of a campus. King’s College London, has 160 buildings scattered around the city. A swanky new campus will open in September, and the hope is that this will provide a focus for university life. LSE, too, is spending heavily on its campus: a £350m ($460m) revamp will open next year. The high proportion of foreign students may contribute to the problem. At LSE, half of undergraduates and nearly three-quarters of the whole student body are from overseas. Being a foreign student can be tough, especially for those who cannot afford to return home during the holidays. Large groups of foreign students may also lead to social fragmentation. Yet for most London university students, the positives outweigh the negatives. Most would recommend their institution; most of those interviewed for this article were, on balance, satisfied with their choices. Even Ajay, a third-year maths, statistics and business student who has not enjoyed his time at university, says he does not regret his decision to study in London: “The job prospects outweigh three years of misery.” 