THE EUROPEAN UNION can preach the virtues of democracy and the rule of law, but what can it do when a member undermines them? Such is the challenge posed by Poland, which has gone from being a poster-child for European integration to a headache. Since coming to power in October 2015, the nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party has gradually increased its hold on the country. It has already placed cronies in the military, the civil service and state-owned companies, and is now politicising the judiciary. On July 3rd around 27 of Poland’s 72 Supreme Court judges will retire. New judges, perhaps more than 40 of them, will be appointed to the Supreme Court in the autumn by the National Judiciary Council, a body whose own members (thanks to new laws) are chosen by parliament. The European Commission warns that the changes threaten judicial independence. Poland is a test for the EU: if it cannot protect the rule of law within the bloc, it can hardly lecture others. Rule of law is a cornerstone of the EU. Without it, the bloc would no longer be the EU, said the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, in reference last summer to the situation in Poland. In response to the burgeoning illiberalism of European governments including Hungary, the EU adopted a framework for protecting the rule of law in 2014. Article 7 of the Treaty of the EU allows it to discipline a state when there is a “clear risk of a serious breach” of the bloc’s values. In the worst case, a country’s voting rights can be suspended. In practice, as Poland’s case shows, the process is not formulaic. Two-and-a-half years have passed since the European Commission launched a probe into the rule of law in Poland. Last December it triggered Article 7, citing a “clear risk of a serious breach of the rule of law” in Poland. Yet Warsaw has refused to back down, merely tweaking its controversial judicial reforms. To proceed with Article 7, and move towards suspending Poland’s voting rights, the commission needs the support of four-fifths of member states. But that will be tricky: while France and Germany support action, many others are reluctant to set a precedent. After questioning the Polish government on its judicial reforms on June 26th, EU countries postponed their decision. Poland’s case highlights the EU’s dilemmas. Pushing too hard could trigger an anti-EU backlash—the last thing Brussels needs, with Brexit looming. Pushing too weakly allows the PiS to push ahead with its purge of the Supreme Court. So the commission is mulling other ways to apply pressure. In the EU’s next long-term budget, funding (of which Poland is the largest beneficiary) could be reduced for countries where the rule of law is at risk. And on July 2nd, the commission launched an infringement procedure against Poland on the grounds that its Supreme Court reforms violate EU law. Warsaw has one month to respond to these concerns. If the commission is not satisfied, Poland could be taken to the European Court of Justice. Letting the judges decide would lift the burden off the commission and the EU’s member states. But that, too, would take time—leaving PiS to complete its judicial overhaul.