“THE sinews of war are infinite money.” For a while, Cicero’s aphorism seemed to be understood by those who controlled the strings of the purses that pay for the world’s health-care budgets. The war in question is that against AIDS, which has now killed some 35m people. At the beginning of the century, disbursements intended to deal with the problem in poor and middle-income countries shot up rapidly. That followed decisions by rich-country governments to attack AIDS, particularly in Africa, where the epidemic was and is at its worst, with newly developed drugs that kept levels of HIV, the virus which causes it, low and symptoms at bay. This allows a patient to lead a normal, superficially healthy life. As a consequence of these drugs and other measures, death rates from AIDS are, indeed, falling. But the drugs, unfortunately, are not a cure. Stop taking them and HIV will rebound in the body, ill health will result and death will beckon. Because people continue to become infected even though the rate of new infection is falling, this means that the quantity of drugs needed continues to rise. Add the fact that policy is shifting to the idea of treating all who are infected, not just those who have reached a particular stage in the deterioration of their immune systems, and demand is increased still further. The current policy of UNAIDS, the United Nations agency tasked with combating the disease, is to put 80% of those infected onto antiretroviral drugs. If achieved, even at today’s infection rates, this would mean 30m people will be taking those drugs for the rest of their lives. Meanwhile, AIDS budgets are flat-lining—a victim, almost, of their own success. AIDS is out of the headlines in rich countries, partly because it is no longer a rich person’s disease, but also because the treatment programme in poor countries, though incomplete, has so far been successful. Doing more with less is a good thing in any field of endeavour, and those combating AIDS have managed that well. How much longer they can manage on what are now all-too-finite resources remains to be seen.