This is part of a two-week discussion on trans issues. Click here for more essays. We’re here, we’re queer, let’s talk? Social-media platforms have done a great job of expanding access to public debate, but a poor job of making it civil and constructive. Any conversation about sensitive topics is bound to be fraught when everyone can say almost anything they want, anonymously, on the internet. Despite the charged environment online, transgender people know that they need to speak out if they are to be heard. “We can no longer stay invisible,” wrote  Sylvia Rivera, a trans activist, in 2002 after decades of being ignored by mainstream society. “We have to show the world that we are numerous.” She died shortly after publishing this call in an essay, aged 50. But even if someone manages to distil their views on, say, transgender rights into a tweet, they can’t control the way that message will be distributed or received. In my role as audience engagement editor for The Economist, I have to try very hard not only to stimulate conversation about our articles on social media, but also to keep it civil. Last week, as part of our Open Future initiative to mark our 175-year anniversary, we published a series of articles exploring transgender identity. It included a range of views, all in front of our paywall. “Thoughtful pieces,” responded  one tweeter. “I really think it is great that The Economist has had the guts to run this series and I like reading it from both sides,” said  another. Members of our Open Future Facebook Group held a serious and oppositional debate touching on government policy as well as personal stories. They kept it cordial thanks to the community spirit within the group. Some readers saw the series as a “public service” and “mind-expanding”. After reading one piece, someone tweeted: “I just learned more than seems reasonably possible from a short article.” However, not everyone agreed. Some Twitter users saw the series as “trans-bashing”, a “transphobia week” and something that “harms the world as a whole”. Others took the opportunity to insult transgender people in general as a “perversion” or worse. There is, clearly, a debate under way on trans issues. Yet many people would rather there was not. For example, consider the argument ably put forward by one of our authors, Vic Valentine, that trans people should have the right to be recognised in law as the gender they feel, known as “gender self-identification”. Many Twitter users who agree add the hashtag #NotADebate to their tweets, indicating that they do not think the policy should be discussed any further. We also published arguments against self-identification; many tweeted angrily that we should not have done so. One said our series was akin to asking a Nazi to speak about Jewish identity (to be clear, none of our writers advocated violence against trans people, let alone extermination). The British government is currently considering reforming the Gender Recognition Act of 2004, to replace the lengthy, bureaucratic process trans people must go through if they want to change their legal sex by a system of gender self-identification. It is holding a public consultation to which anyone is welcome to submit views. But on Twitter, this topic is somehow supposed to be #NotADebate? This is where Twitter, our global conversation that began in 2006, has ended up just 12 years later? I understand and support any transgender person who decides not to talk to anyone who insults them. But those who seek to change the law of the land must find a way to talk about the policies they want changed, and to argue for the policies they think should be brought in. Ultimately, refusing to debate means that opposing views remain unchallenged. In a free society, the only way to answer speech you object to is with more speech. Transgender people exist; it is factually incorrect to say that certain views about them do not. I am continually disappointed by the failures of social-media platforms to create ways that promote open, constructive engagement. Comment threads under Facebook posts and mentions in Twitter replies are woefully poor at promoting civil discussion. Their poor design reminds me of Britain’s House of Commons, where the benches face each other in opposition and debate between serious politicians is poisoned by pantomime boos. Design matters. Modern chambers, such as Scotland’s, are arranged in a horseshoe—and are noticeably quieter and, frankly, more civil. Social-media editors running a big Twitter account, such as those on my team who speak to the 24m followers of @TheEconomist, struggle to make the most out of limited functions. For example, we tweeted each article in our ten-part series individually. It was not easy to link the pieces, even though we conceived of them as a spectrum of views, designed to be read alongside one another. Those people who said our series was “trans-bashing” probably hadn’t read the pieces by those in favour of self-identification. Depending on the vagaries of Facebook’s algorithm that day, they may not even know those pieces exist. To host a better debate online, imagine better design. Comments systems such as Coral  encourage civil behaviour on websites and Facebook threads. Facebook could make wider use of some of the tricks that I and other moderators of small Facebook Groups use to keep debate fair and friendly. Tweets could enable users to include more context to the view being put forward or the article being shared. As Sarah Jeong has written, harassment proliferates on social media partly due to the thoughtless design of user interfaces. Behavioural psychologists and user-experience designers: please talk more to one another. Social-media platforms also have a record of patchy enforcement of their user policies. Twitter says it does not tolerate “repeated and/or non-consensual slurs, epithets, racist and sexist tropes, or other content that degrades someone”. And yet trans tweeters frequently tap on their app only to find death threats and messages that deliberately misgender them, both of which are surely degrading. Meredith Talusan, a trans woman and the executive editor of them, an online discussion platform, argues that Twitter should consider this practice as hate speech. “I’ve had to take extensive steps over the course of several years to manage my emotional reactions to these verbal attacks,” she wrote. No wonder plenty of trans people say they won’t take part in the debate. These lines by Audre Lorde, a lesbian poet and thinker, echo in protest signs, songs, policy statements and tweets today: “When we speak we are afraid our words will not be heard or welcomed. But when we are silent, we are still afraid. So it is better to speak.”