IN A recent interview in which he defended the Trump administration’s immigration policies, John Kelly, the chief of staff, struck a comparatively conciliatory tone. “The vast majority of the people that move illegally into the United States are not bad people” he said. But, he went on, “they're also not people that would easily assimilate into the United States, into our modern society...They don't integrate well; they don't have skills.” Kelly’s argument has some credibility—a number of studies have suggested recent immigrants may be catching up with average American income levels more slowly than in the past. They suggest that a skills gap may be one reason for this. But a new paper suggests the bigger problem is not the talent level of immigrants. Rather, it is the discrimination that ethnic minorities—native and migrant alike—face within America. Earlier studies looking at the rate with which immigrants have caught up with average American earnings have documented that Hispanic immigrants lag behind those migrating from other regions. Because Hispanics have made up an increasing share of migrants in the decades covered by the studies, this has slowed down the overall speed of economic assimilation. The usual explanation matches Mr Kelly’s: Hispanics arrive with lower levels of education and other skills. But these studies have some problems. They use surveys or census data to compare outcomes from different immigrants over decades who initially arrived at about the same time over decades. That approach limits analysis to migrants who arrived before 1990 and excludes migrants who subsequently return home, as well as many of those who later return. Circular and return migration are both large—between 2005 and 2010, for example, nearly 1.4m Mexicans arrived in America and a similar number moved from America to Mexico, most of whom were return migrants. Andres Villarreal and Christopher Tamborini, sociologists, use a new dataset which overcomes these problems. It links a nationally representative survey with 20 years of individual tax records from respondents. This new dataset also allows the researchers to study the assimilation of more recent migrants, including those who arrived in 2000. They deepen their analysis by splitting their sample to measure assimilation between migrants and natives in particular educational, ethnic and racial subgroups. Their results confirm parts of the existing consensus. Hispanic immigrants who arrived between 1980 and 2000 have both the lowest earnings when they first arrive and see the lowest upward trajectory of all groups. Black immigrants do somewhat better on both counts while white and Asian immigrants considerably outperform, ending with median earnings approximately twice those of Hispanic migrants 20 years after arrival. But the results also present three challenges to the view that the low quality of recent immigrants is slowing economic assimilation. First, there is no evidence that recent immigrants overall are doing worse than previous waves over the period 1980 to 2000—indeed, those who arrived between 1994 and 2000 considerably outperformed those arriving between 1980 and 1986 in terms of earnings growth. Second, education and experience cannot account for much of the earnings gap between migrants and natives. Hispanic immigrants begin their time in America with earnings 39% lower than native whites with the same education and experience and that gap only closes to 23% after 20 years. And Hispanic immigrants with a college degree see a larger earnings gap with comparable native whites than do Hispanics with less education. Blacks see a similar performance. Asians and Whites, meanwhile, see far greater convergence, earning more than 90% of the average wage of a white native with the same education and experience after 20 years. A third challenge helps to explain that second result. Immigrants all see rapid and considerable convergence towards the earnings levels of natives with the same education and experience when accounting for ethnicity. After 10 years, Hispanic and Black migrants are seeing earnings more than 80% of natives with the same education, experience and ethnicity. After 20 years, Asians, whites and Hispanic migrants are all at above 90% on this measure while immigrant blacks actually slightly outperform native blacks with the same education and experience. Mssrs Villareal and Tamborini note that because recent immigrants are more likely to be part of disadvantaged racial and ethnic minorities “they may face greater challenges in the US labour market than did immigrants in the past.” Their analysis suggests as much: slow convergence to white wage levels is less the result of low talent amongst migrants than a history and present of discrimination amongst natives.