DANIEL ORTEGA, the president of Nicaragua, was once lauded for ending over four decades of rule by the dictatorial Somoza family. Back in 1979 he was instrumental in the takeover of the country by the leftist Sandinista National Liberation Front, then spent a decade fighting against counter-revolutionary forces funded by the Americans. The Sandinistas made public education free, improved access to health care and nationalised land formerly owned by the Somozas. Now, however, hundreds of thousands have taken to the streets protesting against Mr Ortega, his wife and his succession plans. More than 300 people have been killed since protests began in mid-April (38 of them on July 8th), and thousands more have been wounded. What went wrong? The Sandinistas’ economic policies proved ruinous for the country and they were voted out of office in 1990 (making sure to pilfer national assets for themselves as they stepped down). During the late 1990s, the party entered a power-sharing agreement with the then president, placated the Catholic church with the promise to outlaw abortion, and cosied up to business elites. Mr Ortega was re-elected as president in 2006, and has consolidated power ever since. He stuffed courts with loyalists, took control of all branches of government and most media channels, disbanded the opposition and abolished constitutional term limits. Moreover, he made his wife, Rosario Murillo, his vice-president, and put his children and confidantes in charge of a network of businesses. Nicaraguans acquiesced: the economy was growing at over 4% a year (the fastest rate in Central America), the country was a safe part of an otherwise volatile region, and Mr Ortega continued to support social programmes thanks to generous aid from Venezuela. The economic collapse of Venezuela, which led to a reduction in aid, has changed the situation. On April 18th the Nicaraguan government announced that it would cut pensions and increase worker contributions, in an attempt to save the country’s Social Security Institute, which is projected to run out of cash next year. Protesters who took to the streets were shot at by police. Though Mr Ortega scrapped the proposed reforms a few days later, the protests had by then morphed into an all-out attack on his government. Ms Murillo has called protesters “minuscule and toxic groups”. But the movement is rather different from that. Hundreds of thousands of people have joined marches against the government (in a country of only 6m), backed by the Catholic church, the alliance of businesses that formerly supported the government, and others. The violence is not expected to end soon. Mr Ortega declared on July 7th that he would not step down before elections in 2021. At that time, many believe, he will attempt to install Ms Murillo as president, creating a ruling dynasty with worrying overtones of the Somozas. Some compare the current situation to that in Venezuela, where protests that lacked a leader around whom to rally failed to effect change. But the president should not set too much stall by the weaknesses of the opposition. Somoza clung to power for as long as he could, but he was assassinated only a year after fleeing Nicaragua.