THE first criminal trial to emerge from the investigation Donald Trump has dubbed a “witch hunt” more than 100 times on Twitter—including 10 mentions since July 21st—begins this week in a federal district court in Alexandria, Virginia. Paul Manafort, a longtime Republican power-broker who ran Mr Trump’s presidential campaign in 2016, faces 32 counts of fraud drawn up by Robert Mueller, the special counsel, and could spend the rest of his life in prison. Prosecutors have promised to limit their inquiry to Mr Manafort’s alleged bank and tax misdeeds, but big questions will loom over proceedings. What does Mr Manafort know about Russian election manipulation, and will he divulge that information to Mr Mueller in exchange for leniency? Mr Manafort's alleged crimes stem from his extensive and lucrative work as a political consultant in Ukraine. Mr Mueller says Mr Manafort earned $60m advising politicians, most notably Viktor Yanukovych, a former Russian-friendly president of Ukraine, and “failed to report a significant percentage of it on his tax returns”. The initial charges were filed on October 30th 2017, three months after the Federal Bureau of Investigation raided Mr Manafort’s Alexandria home. The trove of documents prompted charges including conspiracy against America, money laundering, bank fraud, tax evasion and failing to identify himself as a lobbyist. This is a mountain of indictments, and the Virginia trial will address only a portion of them. Another trial in the District of Columbia, slated for September, will handle the rest. After a jury is selected on July 31st, the trial will explore whether Mr Manafort broke the law by hiding payments in off-shore accounts in Cyprus, St Vincent, the Grenadines and Britain to support a lavish lifestyle that included a $5.4m renovation of his Long Island resort home, a $3m Brooklyn brownstone, a Mercedes and a small fleet of Range Rovers, nearly $1m in antique rugs and a $520,440 shopping expedition at a men’s clothing store in Beverly Hills. Prosecutors will try to show that Mr Manafort financed these expenses with unreported payouts from Ukraine and Ukrainian oligarchs supporting Mr Yanukovych, the president who fled the country during a 2014 uprising. In June, the judge presiding over the trial, T.S. Ellis III, chastised prosecutors for dragging Mr Manafort into court only to put pressure on him to provide evidence against Mr Trump in the broader probe. “You don’t really care about Mr Manafort’s bank fraud”, he told the prosecution. “You really care about what information Mr Manafort can give you that would reflect on Mr Trump or lead to his prosecution or impeachment or whatever”. But Judge Ellis ruled later that Mr Mueller’s indictment did in fact fit under his charge as special counsel and that the trial could go forward. As the special counsel is charged with investigating Russian influence on the 2016 campaign, and the evidence against Mr Manafort includes “money paid by pro-Russian officials” in Ukraine, targeting Mr Trump’s former campaign chair is well within Mr Mueller’s remit, the Ronald Reagan appointee decided. Still, prosecutors promised discretion. “I don’t anticipate that a government witness will utter the word ‘Russia'”, a member of the team told the judge. Even without direct questioning on Russian interference in the election, including the June 2016 Trump Tower meeting with Russians offering dirt on Hillary Clinton, the Manafort trial offers some drama. Richard Gates, Mr Trump’s deputy campaign chairman and longtime business partner, has pled guilty to many of the charges Mr Manafort faces and will testify against his old associate. Mr Manafort has said he is innocent of all charges, but if the trial seems to be going badly for him, pressure may rise on him to try to secure a deal with Mr Mueller. If that happens, the nervousness Mr Trump broadcasts so often on Twitter via castigations of Mr Mueller and his “witch hunt” may come into sharper focus.