IN 1988 a publication launched in London that was not quite a comic, not quite a style magazine, not quite an art periodical and not quite a music paper, but a curious hybrid of all these things. Deadline was neither the first nor the last such bold experiment. It was, however, one of the few to flourish. Its success was largely based on one thing: the art of Jamie Hewlett, then aged 20, and already an accomplished and invigorating graphic artist. A book recently republished by Taschen, collecting more than 400 of his artworks, underlines his influence. “Tank Girl”, co-created and illustrated by Mr Hewlett, was the new magazine’s first cover star. Its title character (pictured, below) was tough, unruly and violent, a creature of pure impulse. Shaven-headed, cigarette-chewing and dressed in combat gear and weaponry, she was both a sex symbol and an anti-heroine for the underground, relished equally by men and women in a way few female cartoon characters ever have been. Tank Girl was not there for the viewer’s pleasure. She was there for her own. Over the next seven years she became phenomenally popular. An emblem of a new female spirit, she was fêted by pop stars and glossy magazines in Europe, America and Japan, and inspired lesbian club nights. “[A]t that time in superhero comics women characters were always wearing very tight superhero costumes with very large breasts, always drawn by guys who probably hadn’t had sex with a woman,” Mr Hewlett says in the book. “So I was coming from the strong women, the foul-mouthed women, the drinking, fighting women, the women who would scare most men…Blondie was a tomboy, Joan Jett, Chrissie Hynde, all these women.” Inevitably, Hollywood came calling and in 1995 released an ill-starred film adaptation. It could not capture Mr Hewlett’s distinctive style: a frenetic, gleeful yet always lucid melange of MAD magazine’s early spoofs; the sardonic dystopianism of 2000 AD, a British cult science-fiction comic; more than a touch of Manga; and most crucially, punk-influenced street fashion. The film performed poorly. Worse, it took the edge off—and effectively extinguished—Tank Girl. Deadline folded in its wake. By then, the counterculture that spawned Deadline had found its way into the mainstream. In Britain the indie scene had morphed into the Britpop movement, which was often artistically reactionary and fixated on a kind of false memory of the 1960s and early 70s. Nevertheless, it annexed the charts. The inventive Mr Hewlett was the nearest thing Britpop, and what was then dubbed “Cool Britannia”, had to a house artist. Come 1998 he was housemates with Damon Albarn, the lead singer of Blur and one of Britpop’s key figures. The pair would obsessively watch MTV and grouse at the bands they saw. It wasn’t the acts being so obviously manufactured to which they objected; it was that those acts were manufactured so badly. Which is how the idea of Gorillaz (pictured, below), Mr Hewlett’s second major contribution to pop culture, came about. It was conceived as a virtual band, for which Mr Albarn would provide the music and Mr Hewlett the graphics. Where Britpop had been largely backward- and inward-looking, Gorillaz looked forward and outward. The sound ingeniously combined dub, electronica, hip-hop, and anything else Mr Albarn felt like using. But it was Mr Hewlett’s character designs that held it all together, and made not just the songs but the concept a hit. The blue-haired frontman, 2-D—in appearance a vague amalgam of Tank Girl and Mr Albarn—was a charismatic idiot savant. Murdoc, the bassist, mastermind and martinet, was a hybrid of Keith Richards and Lurch, the manservant from “The Addams Family” cartoons. Drummer Russel Hobbs was a Brooklynite hip-hopper periodically possessed by the spirits of his dead homiez, while bassist Noodles began as a prepubescent Japanese imp and has gradually aged. The advantage of fictive stars is that they are endlessly adaptable. Mr Hewlett could both respond to and run ahead of fashion, allowing his characters’ look to retain its currency where flesh-and-blood celebrities might outgrow their hip haircuts and new clothes. By the mid-2000s Gorillaz were topping pop charts, playing opera-house residencies and scooping up music awards as well as being celebrated for their artwork: Mr Hewlett was the Design Museum’s Designer of the Year in 2006. It was a double whammy unprecedented even for the artiest of art-pop groups. Indeed, Mr Hewlett’s extraordinary visuals have been the highlight of Gorillaz’s live shows, which might just as easily be viewed as musical accompaniments to exhibitions of his work. Such is Gorillaz’s staying power that the group has just released its sixth album, “The Now Now”. Taschen’s lavish monograph emphasises Mr Hewlett’s vision and skill as an artist, one who links the British traditions of the great Ronald Searle—whose Nigel Molesworth and St Trinian’s girls share his own characters’ sense of anarchic mischief—with the boldness of line and colour favoured by American commercial and comic artists of the 20th century. It is a style now prevalent in comics, adverts and animation (it is hard to picture Cartoon Network’s Adult Swim shows, for instance, without Mr Hewlett’s influence). Yet the most telling testimony can be found in cities around the globe, where you see people who might have stepped from the frames of Tank Girl or a Gorillaz video. What Mr Hewlett took from the street, he has repaid with interest.