What might happen if technology, which smothers us with its bounty as consumers, made the same inroads into politics? Might data-driven recommendations suggest “policies we may like” just as Amazon recommends books? Would we swipe right to pick candidates in elections or answers in referendums? Could businesses expand into every cranny of political and social life, replete with ® and ™ at each turn? What would this mean for political discourse and individual freedom? This dystopian yet all-too-imaginable world has been conjured up by Giuseppe Porcaro in his novel “Disco Sour”. The story takes place in the near future, after a terrible war and breakdown of nations, when the (fictional) illegitimate son of Roman Polanski creates an app called Plebiscitum that works like Tinder for politics. Mr Porcaro—who comes armed with a doctorate in political geography—uses the plot to consider questions of politics in the networked age. The Economist’s Open Future initiative asked him to reply to five questions in around 100 words each. An excerpt from the book appears thereafter. *     *     * The Economist: In your novel, an entrepreneur attempts to replace elections with an app that asks people to vote on individual policies. Is that science fiction or prediction? And were you influenced by Italy's Five Star Movement? Giuseppe Porcaro: The idea of imagining a Tinder-style app replacing elections came up because I see connections between the evolution of dating habits and 21st-century politics. A new sort of “tinderpolitics” kicking in when instant gratification substitutes substantial participation. Think about tweet trolling, for example. Italy’s Five Star Movement was certainly another inspiration as it is has been a pioneer in using an online platform to successfully create a sort of new political mass movement. Another one was an Australian political party called Flux. They aim to replace the world's elected legislatures with a new system known as issue-based direct democracy. The Economist: Is it too cynical to suggest that a more direct relationship between citizens and policymaking would lead to a more reactionary political landscape? Or does the ideal of liberal democracy depend on an ideal citizenry that simply doesn't exist? Mr Porcaro: It would be cynical to put the blame on citizens for getting too close to influence decision-making. That would go against the very essence of the “liberal democracy ideal”. However, I am critical towards the pervasive idea that technology can provide quick fixes to bridge the gap between citizens and the government. By applying computational thinking to democracy, an extreme individualisation and instant participation, we forget democracy is not simply the result of an election or the mathematical sum of individual votes. Citizens risk entering a vicious circle where reactionary politics are easier to go through. The Economist: Modern representative democracy was in some ways a response to the industrial revolution. If AI and automation radically alter the world we live in, will we have to update the way democracy works too—and if so, how? Mr Porcaro: Democracy has already morphed several times. 19th century’s liberal democracy was shaken by universal suffrage, and adapted to the Fordist mode of production with the mass party. May 1968 challenged that model. Today, the massive availability of data and the increasing power of decision-making algorithms will change both political institutions. The policy “production” process might be utterly redesigned. Data collected by devices we use on a daily basis (such as vehicles, domestic appliances and wearable sensors) will provide evidence about the drivers of personal voting choices, or the accountability of government decisions. The Economist: Do you believe there is a realistic alternative to populism that satisfies the desire for people to feel civic agency in an increasingly complex and interconnected global economy? Mr Porcaro: Populist movements filled an empty space left by traditional parties. That has little to do with technological changes. Take the example of Italy, again. Democrazia Cristiana and the Communist Party were tools for political socialisation of the citizenry. Then parties started focusing primarily on elections and government. They lost sight of their role as a bridge with civil society and became “the elite”. Berlusconi’s success in the 1990s was truly based on his media power, but also on an offline presence built around the model of AC Milan supporters’ clubs. The Five Star Movement wisely used available online tools, such us MeetUp, to create a grassroots and mainly offline movement. The space for alternative discourses to the populists is there, but it will take more than a slickly-designed mobile app to occupy it. The Economist: You've written papers on public policy in the digital age. What are the tech policy issues we'll be talking about in 30 years that we're not talking about today? Mr Porcaro: If we look at the future, one of the technological promises is to push our economic system towards an outcome economy. Companies will create value not just by selling products and services, but by delivering solutions. Within such an economic system, policies could become sellable commodities. Solutions of this kind are already being developed: think about smart cities for example. This could produce a new wave of privatisation of public policy, or worse, could automate policymaking, reducing the need for democracy overall. However, elected governments could continue to play an active role in the new world of the algorithms and AI. They would continue to be elected by citizens and decide on common and public goals. My wish is that technology could bring democratic participation to a higher, more idealistic level, leaving implementation to the machines. *     *     * Excerpt from “Disco Sour”, by Giuseppe Porcaro (Unbound, 2018). ‘Democracy is not a resort where you come and go. It’s a lifelong contract.’ Polanski’s alleged son stood at the podium, which was an antique carved piece of tiger oak with adjustable top and columned base. ‘We will ban the tourists of democracy,’ he said. The ecstatic crowd, which was composed mainly of civil servants and second- and third-ranking politicians sent on behalf of their ministers, applauded. ‘I’m delighted you gave me the honour of this address to announce a revolution that will change the concept of democracy. Forever.’ His slick, minimalist black suit and white shirt contrasted with the neogothic carvings of the podium, fitting his futuristic discourse. ‘Sometimes, the largest enemy of democracy is not the regime nor the ruling class. It is the fear in our heart,’ he said. ‘The true innovation derives from the vision. The ability to look at the world and see what others cannot see. The construction of the vision is the most important asset and is rare in our time. But having a vision is not enough. Innovation requires that the vision can be realised.’ Applause. And from my seat on the left corner of the first row, I could see the camera moves of the WEBTV networks standing on the higher balcony of the hemicycle. Some of them were zooming in to frame the podium, others were trying to catch a glimpse of the emotions from the audience. I focused my sight on the third row, where a woman in her late fifties, wearing a violet sari wrapped around the waist, with one end then draped over the shoulder baring a midriff, was staring at Nathan, hypnotised. ‘We need to understand people’s dreams, change the world from an ordinary one to one that doesn’t exist yet,’ he said. I looked at the crowd, and I felt they were all diving into the same experience of mystic self-transcendence I’d seen in the gaze of that Indian woman. Dozens of civil servants raised their eyes to the glass dome as if they were praying. ‘Today is an historic day. Plebiscitum® will be adopted by twenty-three electoral systems and fully implemented by the beginning of next year. The official agreement will be ceremonially signed in the library next door, after the closing of this Third and last International Conference on Electoral Devices.’ He paused, leaving the podium and starting to casually walk back and forth on the small stage, slowly. It all sounded solemn and well scripted. It was indeed an historic moment. ‘The new system will be very easy to use. So easy that we plan to lower the voting age to eleven years old, after the first year of successful implementation in the adult cohorts,’ he said. On the background, there was a PowerPoint projected, with pictures of happy citizens smiling while swiping the new app. ‘Stage one: plebiscitum® will be implemented as an educational project. Citizens will be trained.’ He showed a corresponding slide. ‘Stage two: a set of policy decisions will be submitted to citizens via the app. The results will constitute binding opinion, subject to the ratification of the Parliament.’ He moved to the next slide by clicking on the small remote control, which he then wore as if it were a suit-pocket handkerchief. ‘In stage three, all issues will be discussed via the app, and a voting algorithm will connect plebiscitum® to a new Miniaturised Wearable Voting Device, the MWVD®, implanted in each citizen.’ A photo of a luminescent microchip tattooed on the left arms of two youths appeared on the wall. ‘And they will look good,’ he added. I looked at the crowd again, and they were all smiling. ‘Stage four.’ Again, he changed the slide, this time casually pressing the button of the clicker without even taking it out of the suit pocket. ‘The voting algorithm will finally be able to automatically and constantl calculate the political preferences and behaviours of the population. This will be based on a set of data collected by sensors included on everything owned by each citizen. In this final phase, the original voting app will switch back to being an educational and infotainment tool for kids,’ he said. The plan was grandiose, to say the least. ‘These governments will be tuned up with democracy 6.0, which will cut the costs of governance to a sixth of what running the old-fashioned means of electoral representation costs today.’ This was light years ahead of the rudimentary tinderpolitics app he had described a few days before in the Rover Hangover. Plebiscitum® was more like Trojan horse malware, starting a chain reaction to dismantle elections. In computing, a Trojan horse, or Trojan, is a generally non-self-replicating type of malware containing malicious code that, when executed, carries out actions determined by the nature of the Trojan, typically causing loss or theft of data and possible system harm. Trojans often employ a form of social engineering, presenting themselves as routine, useful or interesting to persuade victims to install them on their computers. In other words, it’s a destructive program that masquerades as a benign application. Similarly, plebiscitum® would have acted as a backdoor, contacting a controller, aka the voting algorithm, which could then have unlimited access to any physical activity or material goods owned by citizens. While Trojans and backdoors are not easily detectable by themselves, devices may appear to run slower due to heavy processor or network usage. Malicious programs are classified as Trojans if they don’t attempt to inject themselves into other files, like a computer virus, or otherwise propagate themselves, like worms. Contrary to that practice, twenty-three governments had officially accepted to download and install a Trojan horse in their political operating systems, and they were even conscious of its consequences. I believed I was witnessing the collective suicide of the concept of human-led government. The era of machines was truly starting at that very moment. ‘Everybody will be happy because the central voting algorithm will calculate the optimal mix of policies ranked according to the behaviours and choices people make every day. How people spend their money, for example,’ Nathan continued, ‘or how they use their technological devices.’ Another slide appeared, this time showing a complicated mathematical formula. ‘It will be democratic, because its settings are scientifically regulated to give the choices and behaviours of each citizen equal weight in the final calculations.’ A big, yellow smiley face appeared on the last slide. He paused, and walked back to the podium. He put his hands on the adjustable top, and stared at the audience. ‘The era of tourism democracy ends now,’ he concluded. More applause. I trembled. _________ Excerpt from “Disco Sour”. Copyright © 2018 by Giuseppe Porcaro. Used with permission of Unbound, London. All rights reserved.