NEITHER Seymour Stein nor Danny Fields can remember when they first met. “It seems like forever,” says Mr Stein, now 76, sitting with his daughter Mandy in the London headquarters of Warner Bros Records. “Was he friends with Mommy first or you first?” asks Mandy. “No, I knew him before your mother,” Mr Stein insists. “No,” Mr Fields, 78, says down the phone from New York. “I was friends with his wife, Linda.” In Mr Fields’s version, it was 1973 and he was the editor of 16 magazine—“a teenybopper fan mag”—and he was desperate to get Elton John in its pages. Mr Fields knew the Steins were friends with the musician, so he printed an agency photo of Linda Stein and Mr John, captioning Ms Stein as a “glamorous New York socialite”. “That got me on her party list and we became good friends,” Mr Fields says. “I used her to get to Elton.” Messrs Stein and Fields are two Jewish, gay New Yorkers (Mr Stein’s marriage did not last) who between them nurtured much of the most exciting American rock’n’roll of the 1960s and 1970s. While working for Elektra Records in 1968, Mr Fields signed both MC5 and The Stooges, who served as the ur-bands for the punk-rock explosion and who remain revered by young musicians. Mr Stein, who co-founded and ran Sire Records, cornered the New York punk scene by giving record deals to Talking Heads, Richard Hell and the Voidoids, and the Dead Boys. In 1975 the two men came together when Mr Stein signed the Ramones, the band Mr Fields was managing; Mr Stein described seeing them perform live for the first time as “like sticking my hand in a live electric light socket” (he is pictured, left, with the band and Iggy Pop. Mr Fields is pictured right with Arturo Vega, the Ramone’s art director). The pair was crucial in influencing American rock music between the death of the hippie era and the start of the yuppie years (indeed, Mr Stein coined the term “New Wave” to describe the genre). Look at Rolling Stone’s list of the 500 greatest albums, and you will see the artists they signed or managed throughout. The first Ramones album clocks in at number 33, with their third at 106. Iggy Pop and the Stooges appear at 128, 185 and 191; MC5 at 284 and 446. Talking Heads have four albums on the list. All that leaves aside Mr Stein’s most successful—though non-rock—signing: Madonna. She has three albums on Rolling Stone’s list, and is one of pop music’s biggest ever stars. Both men, by coincidence, have recently released books. Mr Stein has written “Siren Song”, an engrossing memoir, while Mr Fields has published a book of photography, “My Ramones”. The importance of the relationship between the two recurs throughout “Siren Song”, and Mr Stein notes that the Ramones were not the only debt he owed to Mr Fields: it was his recommendation that persuaded Talking Heads to sign to Sire Records. “After months of chasing, that one little endorsement from Danny must have clinched it,” he writes. “What they needed was a hip indie [label] who understood what they were about.” These two impresarios were central to high-energy rock’n’roll—the violent successor to Little Richard and Elvis—because they were receptive to music that others simply couldn’t abide. In his book Mr Stein observes that one reason he was able to snap up so many of the New York bands was that his competitors from the major labels were unwilling to sully themselves by travelling downtown to CBGB, a former biker bar where all the groups played. Mr Fields fell for the bands, the energy and the chemistry of a group on a stage, while Mr Stein has always been animated by the songs. “He was a walking repository of the pop music of England and America,” Mr Fields says. “Anything that had been on the Billboard charts. He was a real record man, of the type that is not being created anymore.” On July 18th, while receiving the Recording Academy’s prestigious Trustees Award, Mr Stein announced that he was leaving Sire Records but would remain active in the music industry. “Writing and promoting my autobiography...brought a flood of memories,” he said. “I long for my indie roots and the greater independence that I experienced back in the 70s, 80s and 90s.” Mr Fields still talks of his excitement at hearing rock’n’roll bands, but he’s not going to be pushing their careers as he himself pushes 80. Yet as long as there are people for whom the platonic ideal of rock music is black leather, ripped denim and roaring amplifiers, the legacy of Messrs Fields and Stein is secure. Listeners the world over still put on that first Ramones record and thrill to its opening chant: “Hey! Ho! Let’s go!”