MANY times in his 30-year Supreme Court career Justice Anthony Kennedy gave the crucial fifth nod to a conservative ruling. But the biggest abortion cases were not among them. In 1992 he was the fifth vote in a ruling that reaffirmed Roe v Wade, the Supreme Court ruling from 1973 that declared abortion a constitutional right. In 2016 he played the same role in striking down a Texas law that restricted access to abortion. His retirement has therefore sparked both hope and fear that whoever replaces him will join the court’s four conservative justices to overturn Roe. Long a professed aim of Republicans, this would not ban abortion. Rather, it would allow states to make their own abortion laws. But it would be momentous. For one thing, abortion would immediately become illegal in four states that have “trigger laws” awaiting such a ruling: Louisiana, Mississippi, North Dakota and South Dakota. How likely is this to happen? A lot more likely than it was. During his presidential campaign Donald Trump promised he would appoint “pro-life” justices to the Supreme Court (his vice-presidential running mate, Mike Pence, said he hoped to see Roe on the “ash heap of history”). Mr Trump made a strong start to that project with the appointment of Neil Gorsuch, who has written about bioethics in a way that suggests he would take pro-lifers’ side whenever possible. The president has since drawn up a list of 25 conservative candidates from which his new pick is likely to come. All have been approved by the Federalist Society, America’s leading organisation of conservative and libertarian lawyers. Several of the contenders are known to be strong social conservatives. When Mr Trump’s nominee is confirmed, America will probably have its most conservative Supreme Court in generations. That is despite the fact that Republicans have only a slim majority in the Senate, which would have to approve the nominee by a simple majority. It would therefore only take “no”s from all Democrats and two Republicans to block the nomination; and Republican senator Susan Collins, a pro-choice moderate, has said that she won’t support anyone hostile to Roe. Yet the nominee is unlikely to admit to such a stance even if asked about it. And to mitigate the risk of losing Republican votes, Mr Trump is already wooing Democratic senators, such as Joe Manchin of West Virginia, who are seeking re-election in November in states he carried in 2016. The furore is an important reminder of the great power the Supreme Court wields over abortion. This is unusual among Western countries, and one of the reasons the issue remains so divisive in America. In European countries, abortion was generally legalised via legislation, sometimes after referenda. Europe’s abortion laws have been hedged about with limits and conditions and justified on the basis on health. America’s declaration of abortion as a constitutional right is quite a different case. Because that ruling was based on a controversial interpretation of the constitution, it has riled opponents in a way that a law passed by an elected parliament would probably not have done. Their anger has also been exaggerated by Roe’s comparative permissiveness: it requires abortion in most cases to be legal into the second trimester, which ends around the 28th week of pregnancy. (In 1992, Planned Parenthood v Casey changed this to the age at which a fetus can survive outside the womb, which is around 24 weeks). Many European countries have a 12 week limit on abortions. Despite the Supreme Court’s power, it is nonetheless unlikely that its new, more conservative bench would overturn Roe any time soon.  First, it will take some time for an appropriate case to come before the court. There are a few travelling through the lower courts that could qualify, including a bill in Mississippi that bans abortion after 15 weeks. Another law, in Iowa, bans abortions after a fetal heartbeat can be detected, which is usually around 6 weeks. But there is no certainty such cases would prompt a rethink on Roe. They might even serve to uphold it. In Planned Parenthood v Casey, the 1992 ruling, the Supreme Court upheld most of the restrictions being challenged (for example, a requirement that young women must get the consent of their parents before having an abortion) but it also reaffirmed Roe. Meanwhile, pro-choice lawyers who are challenging those laws in the lower courts are playing a careful game. In Iowa, for example, the American Civil Liberties Union is challenging the law under the Iowa constitution because any appeal would then end up in the state supreme court, in which case the US Supreme Court could not review it. Second, although the Supreme Court can overturn precedents, and did so this month, when it overturned a ruling from 1977 on labour union fees, it prefers not to. Chief Justice John Roberts, a conservative, has voted to permit states to regulate abortion on many occasions. But because he is also fairly moderate and a strong institutionalist he would probably not want to upend a long-held right. That is why anti-abortion campaigners have said they intend to continue pushing for incremental abortion restrictions, state by state, a strategy that chips away at Roe. Between 2010 and 2016 states enacted 338 restrictions that make it harder to get an abortion. Planned Parenthood has warned that the appointment of a conservative judge will embolden conservative state legislators to pass many more such laws. Meanwhile, there is an important question for Mr Trump. Why would any president want to overturn Roe? Polls have consistently shown that a majority of Americans want it to stand. If it was overturned Republicans, and in particular Mr Trump, who depended heavily on social conservatives for his victory, would also lose one of their most powerful rallying cries.