THERE are three main justifications for imposing a tax on a specific good. One is common to all levies: it raises money for the government. The second, which only applies to a small subset of products, is that its use inflicts costs on third parties that are not factored into its price. A textbook example of such "negative externalities" is air pollution. Without intervention from the government, the economy will produce too many goods that foul up the atmosphere. That benefits both manufacturers and consumers, but harms everyone who breathes in the byproducts. Proponents of so-called "sin taxes" apply this logic to goods deemed to be socially undesirable. They argue that because activities like smoking are unhealthy, smokers should pay additional taxes to compensate the government for the additional spending on medical care that their habit will one day cost the treasury. However, many studies have a tendency to overstate the magnitude of such externalities, since they present gross costs instead of net ones. There is no doubt that smokers, alcoholics and the obese receive a disproportionately high share of public spending on health while they are alive. However, they also tend to die unusually young. That reduces the amount the government must spend on their pensions. Moreover, people who abstain from unhealthy practices also get sick and die eventually. Sooner or later, they will cost public-health systems money as well. The Institute of Economic Affairs, a conservative think-tank, finds that after accounting for sin taxes, welfare costs, crime and early deaths, tobacco and alcohol actually save the British government £14.7bn ($19.3bn) and £6.5bn a year. In contrast, obesity costs it £2.5bn per year. The third rationale for imposing sin taxes is to discourage the use of undesirable products. Critics of such taxes have argued that they are ineffective because the goods they target tend to be addictive, making consumers relatively unresponsive to changes in price. In fact, study after study has shown that sin taxes do tend to reduce consumption. However, the people who are put off by higher prices may well be those who drink alcohol or fizzy drinks only sparingly and are not obese. These consumers impose no obvious costs on the rest of society, but are taxed the same as true sinners. Read the full article here.