A SMALL American town. A pair of brutal murders. A reporter, dogged by a host of demons, returning home to investigate. These are the basic elements of “Sharp Objects”, an eight-part HBO miniseries based on the debut novel by Gillian Flynn, best known as the author of “Gone Girl”. The result in this case, however, is more than the sum of its well-worn parts. Camille Preaker (Amy Adams) has not been much missed in Wind Gap, Missouri, nor is she welcomed now. Camille’s peers have children of their own. Local police consider her a scavenging journalist bent on stirring up trouble. Her patrician mother, Adora (Patricia Clarkson), shares their opinion: she can barely muster threadbare civility when Camille turns up, unannounced, and is appalled by her mission. “Go report somewhere else,” she hisses at Camille, “and leave these people be.” Perhaps this coldness is understandable. Still, there’s something rotten about Wind Gap, and the viewer knows it as surely as Camille does. Adora’s ice-cream hued mansion is the old-money linchpin of the small community that otherwise consists of dive bars, clapboard houses, casual misogyny and the hog-slaughtering plant from whence, unacknowledged, her riches flow. Camille escaped to the city to nurse her grief—a beloved younger sister died mysteriously years ago—and her scars. The mental ones are evident enough in her booze-puffed face and violent sexual fantasies, but they manifest themselves in other ways too. She has carved words—“CHERRY”, “DIRT”, “RIPE”, “VANISH”—into the skin of her arms, hips, stomach and thighs. Her return home is reluctant, only made on the command of her editor, Frank Curry (Miguel Sandoval), who is determined to make a splash covering what may be the work of a serial killer. The first little girl had been found a year before, strangled and dumped in a river. A second is missing, but soon turns up: her body stuffed in a narrow alley next to a hardware store, bruises circling her neck. Both have had all their teeth removed. Despite this elaborate setup, and the forward momentum driven by both the investigation into the murders and the fraught unravelling of relations between Camille and her family, “Sharp Objects” maintains a viscous pace. Part of this is perhaps the influence of Ms Flynn, who as well as being responsible for the equally coiled source material, has also been involved in writing several of the episodes. Here, as with “Gone Girl”, we are presented with shifting, conflicting narratives and points of view, all veined through with violence and dark humour. And like “Gone Girl”, “Sharp Objects” is a drama of strong-but-flawed female characters. For many involved in the production this is familiar territory. Marti Noxon, the show’s creator and showrunner, is a former writer and executive producer on “Buffy the Vampire Slayer”. The director, Jean-Marc Vallée, cut his television teeth on “Big Little Lies”, another female-led HBO miniseries. The eight hour-long episodes provide welcome space for actors with the power to command complex and not always sympathetic roles: Ms Adams is faultless as Camille, forever teetering between being likeable and reviled, pitied and an object of envy and scorn. Ms Clarkson makes an equally compelling Adora, fluttering spitefully around her daughter like a malevolent moth, a study of long-suppressed female loathing. In spite of the directness of its title, “Sharp Objects” unspools slowly. This is not a flaw: it merely allows the show more time to get under the skin. And despite the familiarity of the archetypes, “Sharp Objects” manages to find new depths to explore and more pressure points to needle, presenting the viewer with an intimate, fresh take on female violence.