THE rise of al-Qaeda, and America’s resulting “war on terror”, has been well documented on film. Less known are the domestic efforts of Arab countries to stem jihadism. “Path of Blood”, a documentary released on July 13th in Britain and America, is made up largely of footage gathered by Saudi Arabian security forces from al-Qaeda cells. It depicts a grisly cat-and-mouse game between 2003 and 2009. Much of the footage was shot by the terrorists themselves, and it reveals the unsettling humanity of those who take other’s lives. The film opens with a young man called Abdulaziz looking nervously into a camera, trying to record a message of jihad before he carries out a suicide-bomb attack. But he can’t do it. He stumbles over his words, gets chided by those off camera, reaches for a coffee and jokingly complains about being given a dirty cup. He comes across as goofy and naive. Indeed, the exchange recalls “Four Lions” (2010), Chris Morris’s send-up of bumbling jihad, in which a would-be terrorist records a comically inept message of hate while brandishing a child’s toy rifle. While the incompetence of Mr Morris’s characters is played for laughs, Abdulaziz seems to use jokes to contain his fear of the car bomb he’d eventually detonate outside the Traffic Directorate building in Riyadh. These darkly comic moments crop up repeatedly in the documentary, whether it is an embarrassed terrorist revealing his underwear at a training camp or a car-bombing that is almost aborted because the attackers forgot to fill up with petrol. The young jihadists come across as uncomfortably ordinary at times, jarring with the hatred they espouse and the heinous acts they carry out. The film is also unapologetically gory. Footage recorded by security forces following the bombing of a residential compound in Riyadh reveals the aftermath of an attack, with the bodies of children being drawn from the rubble. Another scene shows the moments before the torture of Paul Marshall Johnson, an American engineer; his captors are convinced that he knows more about American activity in Saudi Arabia than he is letting on. This is one of the few instances where the footage is cut short, the ensuing abuse and murder presumably deemed too gruesome to put on screen. Mark Boal, the writer and producer of such blockbusters as “The Hurt Locker” (2008) and “Zero Dark Thirty” (2012), and frequently Hollywood’s lens on the war on terror, is an executive producer of “Path of Blood”. It is easy to see why the project appealed to him. There is little commentary—an attempt to present the footage as raw—and this adds to a heightened sense of drama and peril. Brooding music underlies much of the film. Excerpts from Voice of Jihad, al-Qaeda’s propaganda magazine (with the group’s damning edicts against its enemies voiced incongruously in Tom Hollander’s clipped British tones) ratchet up the on-screen tension between the terrorists and the security forces. The film culminates in a failed attempt on the life of Muhammad bin Nayef, who at the time led Saudi Arabia’s efforts against al-Qaeda (and was later elbowed out as crown prince by Muhammad bin Salman). The graphic result of the explosion provides a fitting final act, al-Qaeda having come close enough to the government to rattle it, but unable to deliver a fatal blow. Jonathan Hacker, the director, says that the story is more powerful when told through the subjects’ own words and actions. This means that viewers are exposed to brutal fanaticism but they learn little about the political and societal factors behind their atrocities, seeing much of the blood but little of the path that led to it. Why did the Saudi government choose to release the nearly 500 hours of footage, years after the events took place? Mr Hacker does not know for sure. He points out that Saudi Arabia made no effort to influence the film itself, and reckons that the government may want people to “understand that they are fighting and have fought very hard against al-Qaeda”. That may be true of the government’s response since al-Qaeda decided to attack Saudi Arabia. But the film has little to say about how the country contributed to the growth of jihadism before that: how its intolerant Wahhabist brand of Islam fed extremist ideology; how Saudi Arabia (and America) helped to create the embryo of al-Qaeda by supporting Arab volunteers fighting against the Soviet Union in Afghanistan; and how Saudi Arabia long coddled the likes of the Taliban, who sheltered al-Qaeda. Viewers are duly shown the bravery of the domestic security forces. Yet without more historical context, the footage gives too much credence to the government’s idea of itself as a largely benign force resisting the spread of radical Islam. The events in “Path of Blood” took place over a decade ago, but of course jihadism is still a problem. The barbarity of al-Qaeda’s members is shocking, but not surprising. Instead the film’s most affecting moments come from the credulous naivety of the young jihadists, struggling to carry out a doomed attempt to undermine the Saudi state by monstrous means. Alongside its shows of force and violence, the film reveals some very human weaknesses: the desire for a shared purpose, however misguided, and the dangerous appeal of a simple worldview. Getting to these truths is difficult viewing.