THE meeting was supposed to last for just an hour. And yet on July 11th, a gathering convened by the Knox County Sheriff’s Office in Knoxville, Tennessee dragged on for three times as long. The delay was caused by a group of protesters demanding the county’s withdrawal from a programme known as 287(g), run by America’s Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency (ICE). This once-obscure scheme, which gives local police officers the authority to access immigration databases and start deportation proceedings, has emerged as a flashpoint in the national debate over immigration. The 287(g) programme, named after the section of the 1996 law that created it, is designed to help local law-enforcement authorities fight illegal immigration. Under the scheme, police departments and sheriff’s offices—who technically lack the authority to enforce federal immigration law—partner with ICE to arrest, detain and deport illegal immigrants charged with serious crimes. The programme is controversial. Whereas ICE touts 287(g) as a “tremendous benefit to public safety”, critics say it encourages racial profiling and sows mistrust among immigrant communities. A recent study by researchers at the Cato Institute, a libertarian think-tank, found that it has a negligible effect on crime. Such concerns have led to numerous federal investigations. In 2009, the General Accounting Office (GAO), a congressional watchdog, found that ICE failed to provide agencies participating in the 287(g) programme with clear objectives or proper supervision. Rather than targeting the “worst of the worst” criminals, like murderers and rapists, the GAO found that law-enforcement officers often arrested immigrants for minor violations like speeding or drinking in public. In 2010, the Department of Homeland Security’s Inspector General’s office estimated that just 9% of people arrested under the 287(g) programme had committed serious crimes. The Justice Department has accused several local law-enforcement agencies of racial profiling. Given the highly partisan nature of the immigration debate, it is little surprise that growth in the 287(g) programme has followed the ebb and flow of the national political cycle. After growing rapidly during the presidency of George W. Bush, the programme languished under Barack Obama. Its funding was cut by two-thirds, and the number of participating law enforcement agencies fell by more than half. Since the inauguration of Donald Trump, who vowed on the campaign trail to “expand and revitalise” 287(g), the number of agencies participating in the programme has more than doubled to 78 (see chart). In February ICE estimated that the programme’s growth will help boost 287(g)-related arrests by 70%. The fight over 287(g) is likely to continue. This year, liberal groups have held protests against the programme in half a dozen states. Democratic lawmakers in Massachusetts recently tried to ban it altogether. Conservative politicians, meanwhile, have called for its expansion. Michael Williams, a Republican state senator from Georgia who drove a “deportation bus” during his recent campaign for governor, proposed instituting 287(g) statewide. Peach State voters, however, seemed unconvinced: in May, he finished last in the Republican gubernatorial primary election with less than 5% of the vote.