IT WAS a lovely idea: for the coronation of Queen Victoria on June 28th 1838, an entrepreneur thought a paper printed in golden-hued ink would make for a lucrative keepsake. The Sun (no relation to today’s tabloid of the same name) partnered with this businessman, Thomas de la Rue, a printer who also dabbled in making straw hats and paper bonnets. He had experimented with inks, and came up with a compound that gave enough of an appearance of gilding to do the trick. The so-called “Golden Sun” was an astonishing hit. It went through 20 editions and sold an estimated 250,000 copies—an astonishing number at that time. The reverse of the new queen’s portrait was left unprinted, so it could be cut out and mounted; the September 1840 issue of Monthly Belle Assemblée noted that the portrait appeared in a museum its correspondent visited in St Omer, France, alongside more ancient artefacts. (De La Rue’s company survives to this day under that name, and prints banknotes and passports, among other things. It recently objected to the Home Office picking a French-Dutch firm to print post-Brexit passports.) Even 180 years later, the newspaper still looks a treat. Prospero recently got a peek at a surviving copy at the St Bride Printing Library, a piece of late 19th-century printing history just off Fleet Street, London journalism’s ancestral home. The library’s manager, Bob Richardson (pictured below), keeps this copy of the Sun in the institution’s teaching collection both for the rarity of a newspaper printed in this hue, and as a cautionary tale. It made its printers violently ill. It was common for printers to come down with ailments of all sorts. Before the professions of typesetters and pressmen split, most printers were jacks-of-all-trades, completing apprenticeships that required they learn every task in a printing office. This brought them in constant contact with lead, antimony, other heavy metals, and toxic ingredients and solvents. The December 1879 issue of the Printers’ Circular noted as a miscellaneous item with little reflection on its importance: In the Circular’s April 1879 issue, under obituaries, the item appears: “A printer in Avoca, Iowa, has died of poison from holding type in his mouth.” But De la Rue's golden hue was far worse for those men and women employed in its manufacture than lead had been. The impact would have been lost to history, save that Dr Gurney Turney wrote a letter in October 1838 in the London Medical Gazette about a 19-year-old patient, John Oakley. Oakley presented himself on July 17th with symptoms including “itching of the scrotum”, “inflamed sebaceous follicles” and pubic and head hair that had turned a “grass-green colour”. The boy had vomited a greenish fluid, his oesophagus was constricted and hot, and he had stomach pain. The doctor determined he was working in the printing office in which the “Golden Sun” was printed. Turney, his letter went on, had asked to visit the plant. There were no health-and-safety inspectors ticketing violators at the time, so the bosses happily let him in. De La Rue didn’t create an ink, as his gold-hued materials were too stiff to use directly for the relief printing method required. Instead, the papers were printed with a pale, tacky receiving medium like the sizing used by painters to prepare a canvas. Workers dusted on the golden-hued powder while the papers remained wet and brushed off the excess. The air must have been dense with the dust. A dozen workers told Turney of suffering Oakley’s symptoms and worse. The doctor was unable to get a sample of the powder, as its maker considered it proprietary. His report was taken up in the mainstream press, and he received letters from more of those afflicted. In a later article in the Gazette, in February 1839, Turney wrote that he’d determined the ink was made from brass filings. One informant relayed a secondhand report that the men who created the brass filings “died off like rotten sheep” in its creation. Another noted that he was seized by pain and seizures, as were other workers. As many as 40 people had handled the gilding. The lifespan of these workers after this is unknown. Oakley returned for a couple of visits after his initial treatment and appeared much improved (though still greenish) about 10 days later. But then he failed to reappear thereafter. No other reports survive, and printers of that day didn’t have long and happy lives in any case. No worries for Mr Richardson or others who handle the “Golden Sun” today. The inert substance wedded to paper seems to pose no threat—no reports emerged of readers being poisoned by the paper, and collectors seem to have suffered no ills. But Mr Richardson is a bit chary nonetheless when he holds the newspaper—perhaps due to its age and fragility, or perhaps in memory of those poisoned printers.