THE three southern ladies entering the Marriott Hotel in Greensboro, North Carolina, were clear about why they loved Diamond and Silk. “They’re very conservative,” said Stephanie, who had driven for two hours over from Charlotte to watch the social-media stars and professional Trump fans perform their new show. “And, you know, they’re black,” said Gracie. “That means black people don’t need to have a certain point of view.” It also makes some whites feel better about holding a certain view. Soothing Trump voters’ anxiety over their reputation for racism is the main function of Lynnette Hardaway and Rochelle Richardson, as Diamond and Silk are properly called. It has made them highly successful political entrepreneurs. Members of a family of small-time televangelists, the former Democrats emerged on YouTube during the 2016 Republican primaries, when they began uploading pro-Trump video messages. One of the first to pass a million views—a diatribe against Megyn Kelly, then a Fox News journalist, after she asked Mr Trump why he verbally abused women—illustrates their method. It features Ms Hardaway raging in her dining-room against that “bitch…Megyn Kelly or Kelly Megyn” and advising her to “leave my man Donald Trump the hell alone.” Ms Richardson, sitting snug against her sister, accompanies her with hyperactive head rolls, hand gestures and expostulations of “mm-hmm” and “That’s right!” Like their hero, the sisters are reality-politics stars: shouty, free with facts and comical, though apparently in earnest. They have 1.7m followers on Facebook, a line in Diamond and Silk merchandise (including a song, “Trump’s Yo President”, downloadable for $1.99), and a prominent perch on the right. They have appeared on stage with Mr Trump and in the Oval Office. Last week they spoke at the National Rifle Association’s annual shindig, and the week before they testified to Congress on their contested claim to have been censored by Facebook. They say Mr Trump opened their eyes to the way Democratic identity politics keeps blacks poor and loyal to the left. When politicians stop talking about race, they suggest, racial inequalities dissolve. “Trump’s not a racist, he’s a realist,” Ms Hardaway says. “The only colour he sees is green and he wants you to have some.” Such arguments have long been popular on the right, as an endorsement of small-governmentism and as an explanation for why nine out of ten blacks vote Democratic, though 70% identify as conservative or moderate. Yet black voices give those familiar lines a special power. Ms Hardaway describes blacks as living on “the Democratic plantation” and Hillary Clinton as a “slave master”. The rapper Kanye West recently echoed her. He suggested his fellow African-Americans prefer Democrats because they are “mentally enslaved” by a Democratic platform unduly focused on past injustice. Mr Trump, who loves a celebrity boost, claimed Mr West had “doubled” his black following. There is no evidence for that; only 13% of blacks like Mr Trump. Diamond and Silk are in fact more revealing of where the president stands with African-Americans, not least because they appear to have few black fans. During an hour-long show in Greensboro, before an almost exclusively white crowd, the sisters drew on other black conservative strains. They offered hints of the love of Mammon in the prosperity gospel and, in their gags about black poverty and naivety, a comic spin on the disdain for other blacks that Ta-Nehisi Coates, a writer, divines in Mr West. Yet their act was mainly an exercise in rattling off Mr Trump’s positions—the sisters claimed to be pro-wall, pro-gun, against destroying Confederate monuments and sounded fairly relaxed about male sex pests—interspersed with reminders that they are, you know, black. The validating effect of this combination was what many in the audience had paid $50 a ticket for. Ms Richardson’s black-sister shtick and the snarks against black heroes such as Barack Obama and Oprah Winfrey got all the biggest cheers. “All these white folk here to see two black girls and people say we’re racist!” a woman seated behind Lexington kept repeating to her husband. There is a debate about how sincere Ms Hardaway and Ms Richardson are. But it rather misses the point. Political activists do not use stage-names. Whatever the sisters’ private views, Diamond and Silk is an act (a “routine”, Mr Trump calls it) which is not merely designed, but boastfully promoted, to fill the role of token black face in a mostly white political movement. The fact that the sisters are comedians makes their artifice—and their fans’ willing suspension of disbelief—seem all the more obvious. Mr Trump’s rise has brought a proliferation of such political role-playing. The president reprises the role of boardroom titan he played on “The Apprentice” and his supporters pretend that this was why they chose him. He pretends to be pious, and white evangelicals pretend to care. Such performances are no more credible than Diamond and Silk and do not disguise the real source of Mr Trump’s appeal: a reshaping of the American right around cultural anxieties so impolite and reactionary that even his more devoted supporters prefer not to acknowledge them. The blackest comedy It is good that such voters do not like to be considered racist. It is also understandable that many of them feel frustrated to be told that the casual bigotry which was acceptable in the 1980s no longer is. It is not their fault that the definition of racism in America has broadened. But the racial battle-lines Mr Trump has drawn leave no room for such niceties. In reality, African-Americans always vote in line with their interests, and a president who has equivocated on white supremacist violence naturally repels them. Fully 84% consider Mr Trump racist. That represents an American tragedy, a reaffirmation of racial-political divisions from which Diamond and Silk provide no comic relief. The joke is on anyone who thinks they do.