FOR several years delegations have shuffled between Beijing and Rome in the hope of reaching an agreement over how to appoint Catholic bishops in China. Recent rumours suggest that a deal is closer than ever. But what are the roots of the disagreement between the Vatican and the Communist Party? How could both sides benefit from resolving it? Catholics in China are required to worship in closely watched, registered churches run by priests chosen by the party. The Vatican is fairly pragmatic about this, even though devout Catholics bridle at the fact that an atheist ruling party is picking their clergy. Over the years careful diplomacy has ensured that in most cases these state-sanctioned churches are supervised by bishops whom both the Vatican and the party consider acceptable. Nevertheless, there are still some government-backed bishops whom the Vatican finds intolerable. There are also many bishops whom the Vatican has appointed without the consent of the Communists. Perhaps half of all Chinese Catholics attend masses celebrated by these “underground” clergy. Participants risk arrest and many other flavours of persecution. The priority of the negotiations is to settle on a clear mechanism to ensure that in future no bishop can be appointed without the blessing of both the pope and the Chinese government. While formalising such a system would narrow divisions in the Chinese church over time, the recent rumour is that a pact could also lead to some reorganisation of the church as it presently exists in China. In January the Holy See was reported to have warned underground bishops in two dioceses that if a deal is done they will be asked to make way for officially approved clergy who had previously been excommunicated by Rome but whom the party has asked the Vatican to forgive. In effect, this would mean herding their flocks into the state-sanctioned church system. The Communist Party would welcome any shrinking in the number of unregistered churches. It abhors social activity beyond its control. It probably also believes that a formal accord on bishops would be a big step towards persuading the Vatican to move its embassy from Taiwan to Beijing. Meanwhile the Vatican probably thinks that being on better terms with the Chinese government can help spare believers from unnecessary suffering, and that it might earn the church greater freedom to evangelise. In recent years the number of Catholics in China is thought to have levelled off or even declined, while the number of Protestants has rocketed. Yet there are big risks, too. In the event of a deal it is possible that some underground Catholics would choose to join a schismatic church rather than co-operate with party-approved clerics. And Pope Francis would surely face some criticism for reaching an accommodation with a repressive regime.