THE curtain-raising moments of “Patrick Melrose” hurl the viewer into the world of their eponymous hero with brisk efficiency. A phone—black, with a rotary dial—rings. When Patrick (Benedict Cumberbatch) picks up the receiver he is slow and slurring. Unsteady on his feet. “I’m afraid I have rather bad news,” the tinny voice on the other end of the line says. “Your father died the night before last.” Patrick sways and grasps hold of a shelf to stop himself from keeling over, but not from shock. A syringe—its plunger shot home—has fallen to the floor. There’s a spot of blood at the inner elbow of his crisply striped shirt. Then heroin hits his system; he smiles and begins to laugh. The drama is based on five novels published between 1992 and 2011 by Edward St Aubyn, a British novelist who bears more than a passing resemblance to his protagonist. Like Patrick, Mr St Aubyn came from a wealthy, upper-class family. Like him, his upbringing was nightmarish. Patrick’s father (grippingly played here by Hugo Weaving) was frustrated, tyrannical, cruel and abusive. Eleanor, his American socialite mother (Jennifer Jason Leigh), was threadbare from years of abuse—of alcohol and from her husband. And, like Patrick, Mr St Aubyn spent a good many years addicted to heroin and held fast in the grip of his own demons. It is no mean feat to boil five kinetic novels—each of which tackles a different portion of Patrick’s life—into a five-part drama without losing the flavour of the source material. But David Nicholls (“One Day”, “Starter for 10”), who adapted the books for television, has done an excellent job. Memories or images that briefly bubble up in one episode are revisited and explored in another. Different periods have complementary but distinct looks. A traumatic childhood memory of a holiday in the south of France when Patrick is raped by his father is washed in an over-ripe mid-century palette of fig-purples, greens and pinks. A New York interlude in the 1980s when Patrick has to go and pick up his father’s remains is more sharply contrasted, with sharp jags of taxi-cab yellow. The subject matter is devastating, as those who have read the novels will attest. Viewers are spared neither heart-breaking cruelty (although the actual abuse takes place behind a closed door), nor the ruinous complicity of adults, friends, family members and treacherous inner voices. (“The trick is”, Eleanor tells her young son, dancing by herself in a stupefied fog of champagne, “not to think about it.”) We are repeatedly shown the myriad ways people self-medicate to dull miseries and cope with intense trauma. The portrait of Patrick’s addiction, in particular, is very far from glamorous. In New York, initially determined to use his father’s death to give himself the strength to go clean, he quickly puddles into a blackout orgy of booze, Quaaludes, cocaine, speed and heroin. Desperate to score and unable to get hold of a regular dealer, he finds himself wandering around the roughest of neighbourhoods alone and utterly vulnerable. “He says that you might have a new syringe. Is it very blunt?” he asks a couple of fellow junkies once he’s finally managed to get his hands on a few grams. “Christ that’s not a syringe it’s a bicycle pump!” he shrieks when he sees it. Never mind: he’s desperate. He shoots up in his benefactor’s filthy bathroom stall so hurriedly that he first drops the enormous needle down the toilet and then, after wiping it off on his shirt, misses the vein. Despite such moments of squalor, the show is well judged. Patrick is a sympathetic character, despite his extreme privilege, which might otherwise prove off-putting. (There was initial resistance to Mr St Aubyn’s novels because of this milieu.) And amid the intensity of the subject matter, there are touches of humour both black—“What’s the point of a fucking window if you can’t jump out of it?”—and laugh-out-loud hilarious, often courtesy of Mr Cumberbatch’s spectacular comic timing and the acidity of his character’s pronouncements. “Your father’s ashes will be available tomorrow afternoon,” he is told by the director of the funeral home. “No chance of a rush job?” It is a strong flavour, but “Patrick Melrose” is, quite simply, a triumph. “Patrick Melrose” is showing on Showtime in America and Sky Atlantic in Britain