ON MAY 27TH Colombians will vote in their country’s most peaceful presidential election for decades. Levels of violence have dropped significantly since the government started to negotiate a deal with the FARC guerrillas in 2012. But voters still look inclined to choose Iván Duque, one of whose main campaign pledges is to modify the peace accord. Mr Duque’s political mentor is Álvaro Uribe, a former president who is the peace deal’s fiercest critic. Its monitors say the FARC has so far fulfilled its part of the agreement and turned in weapons. Yet some claim the FARC has not disarmed completely. If it has not, Mr Duque says he will take away its benefits (members receive money to help their reintegration into Colombian society). Why does his attitude towards the peace deal appeal to Colombian voters? The conflict with the FARC, the longest-running domestic conflict in the western hemisphere, killed over 200,000 people and displaced around 7m. It took four years for the government and the FARC to agree how to end it. The main purpose of the deal that did so was to disarm the FARC and convert it into a legal political party. It gives the FARC ten congressional seats for the next eight years, and creates a transitional justice system (JEP), that dictates sentences of, at worst, eight years of restricted liberty for FARC members who confess their crimes. Juan Manuel Santos, the president, asked Colombians to approve an earlier version of the deal through a referendum. They turned it down, by a small margin, so government negotiators thrashed out a new deal. But instead of putting this one to a referendum, Mr Santos ratified it through congress, where his party led the majority coalition. Voters felt cheated. The one point the new deal did not modify was the one many Colombians most vehemently opposed: permitting the participation of FARC members in politics without first serving sentences for their crimes. Delays in the JEP’s setup mean the FARC will take their seats in congress before they face a judge. Some voters have also been disappointed by the deal’s sloppy implementation. Many areas vacated by the FARC, where the state has little presence, have been taken over by the group’s deal-rejecting dissidents, the ELN (another guerrilla group) and drug-traffickers with paramilitary origins. These armed groups are funded by the cocaine trade, which the peace deal also hoped to curb. But reports are expected to show that the land planted with coca increased by 30% between 2016 and 2017. So a Duque presidency could strike a real blow to the peace deal. Mr Duque has said that it should be incompatible to be both a member of congress and someone who has committed crimes against humanity. But the FARC’s participation in politics is protected by the constitution. Changing that would take anywhere between one and two years. The JEP is an easier target. It is also enshrined in the constitution, but the law that regulates it will need Mr Duque’s approval if he is elected president. He could also halt the JEP by withdrawing from congress the law that establishes its procedures. Either tactic would wrap the peace deal in interminable legal battles. Gustavo Petro, a former leftist mayor of Bogotá and Mr Duque’s main rival, is more supportive of the deal, but its backers worry about the contradictory messages his campaign has given about radicalising it by introducing extreme measures such as land expropriation. Still, with congress controlled by the right, there is little chance that his version could ever materialise. See also: “Colombians hope for change in the first post-war presidential election″