The Stanley Matthews FA Cup Final of 1953. England’s victory in the 1966 World Cup. England’s performances in the European Championship of 1996 and the feeling of national renewal they engendered. These are among the defining moments in English football history. The link between them is their location: Wembley stadium. The old ground and its familiar twin towers may be long gone—the site was rebuilt at exorbitant cost in the early 2000s—but Wembley remains the closest thing English football has to a heart. And now the Football Association (FA), the English game’s governing body and the owner of the stadium, is considering selling it. An American businessman, Shahid Khan, has bid around £600m. Why might the FA sell off its prime asset? The case for doing so is strong. Wembley is a drain on the FA’s resources. The reconstruction cost a fraction under £800m and the FA still owes £140m of that to its creditors. The FA has worked hard to make Wembley pay for itself. It created Club Wembley, a membership scheme directed at the corporate hospitality market that generates revenues of more than £55m a year. But the organisation is still bound to pay for upkeep and improvements to the building and, after interest payments, Wembley still makes a loss. The main objections to the sale are sentimental. The Portuguese manager of Swansea City, Carlos Carvalhal, likened the potential deal to selling Big Ben and Buckingham Palace. More substantial is the idea that a publicly owned stadium is a source of national pride. But Wembley itself was rescued from demolition in the 1920s by a private firm, the Wembley Stadium and Greyhound Racecourse Company. It was only transferred into government hands in 1999 ahead of its reconstruction. The idea of a national stadium does not resonate elsewhere, and certainly not the idea of one in public hands. Two of the better-run national football operations—in Germany and Spain—move their national teams’ home games around the bigger club-owned stadiums. The French national team has a home ground, the Stade de France, but it is owned by a construction company, Vinci. The FA has an opportunity to free itself from the construction and venue business (its involvement in which has coincided with a period of high turnover among its leadership) and renew focus on its original mandate: football. Greg Clarke, the chairman of the FA, has pledged to put the proceeds into a trust to allocate to improving local facilities. He has also noted that one in seven lower-level fixtures are lost to the weather and only one in three grass pitches is considered of an adequate standard for play. Some sceptics ponder how effectively the FA would manage its windfall and whether Mr Khan’s bid should be used to draw out other, more lucrative offers. But neither argument refutes the idea of a privately owned stadium. Depending on the arrangement made with any buyer, private ownership might also encourage the England team to play elsewhere more frequently. This in turn might allow the team to develop a stronger connection with fans in the Midlands and the north. The improvement of hundreds of local facilities would benefit thousands of players. And an FA concentrating solely on football ought to be able to offer more dynamic leadership. These things should matter more to the sport than the ownership of the national stadium.