It has showcased a man in a hamster wheel. It has presented a bearded lady in a golden dress. And this year’s final includes a MeToo-inspired anthem by a singer who intersperses lines like “I’m not your toy, you stupid boy,” with chicken sounds (and movements). The Eurovision Song Contest, an extravagant annual event which has its finale in Lisbon on May 12th, is neither about music nor about Europe. Yes, it helped launch the careers of Abba and Celine Dion. But behind the smoke, elaborate costumes and extraordinary dance routines, Eurovision is really about pushing boundaries, celebrating the idea of multi-culture over mono-culture, and being able to laugh at oneself. This is precisely what has caused a clash with the Chinese broadcasting regulator. Viewers in China who watched the semi-finals earlier this week saw rainbow flags covered by clouds of pixels. Two songs—the Irish performance, which included two male dancers acting out a love-scene, and Albania’s performance by an artist with tattoos—were censored altogether. Although homosexuality has been legal in China since 1997 (and ceased to be an official mental disorder in 2001), a 2016 law has banned the broadcasting of “abnormal sexual relationships and behaviours,” including same-sex relations. A recent crackdown on displaying tattoos is part of a broader effort to “clean up” subcultures. (Hip-hop is another target.) The European Broadcasting Union swiftly withdrew any further broadcasting rights from Mango, a Chinese television channel. “This is not in line with the EBU's values of universality and inclusivity and our proud tradition of celebrating diversity through music,” wrote the union in its explanation. The message was clear: it’s all or nothing with Eurovision and there’s no picking and choosing. When the song festival was first conceived, in the 1950s, it was an attempt to unify a fractured post-war continent. Then, as now, that sounded wonderfully naive and easy to mock. But then, as now, it also broadcast into living rooms alien ideas, languages and types of people. At first diversity meant odd people singing boring ballads in a different tongue—unusual at a time when all television was national. But starting in the 1970s, when disco music made its entry, the festival started to become a beacon for gay people and a symbol of European open-mindedness. By 1997 it had its first openly-gay contestant and in 1998 Dana International, an Israeli transgender-artist, won the contest with the pop song “Diva.” Those who complain about Eurovision’s bad music, tacky costumes and unfair voting blocs (like this) miss the bigger point. Its greatest accomplishment is that it shows how very different people can coexist, share a stage and even have fun in the process. It is a symbol of what tolerance looks and sounds like, listening to someone caterwauling at top volume in an outrageous wig. And at a time when anything that offends anyone seems to be met by a knee-jerk call for a ban, the absence of such calls for Eurovision again speaks to its merits. The Chinese government’s lack of jocularity is part of a bigger push to promote one interpretation of “appropriate” culture and norms—ones the state ordains. In this spirit the government has been cracking down on all sorts of material which it doesn’t consider to be conducive to the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. Things have been censored for being foreign, “abnormal” or plain silly (as we wrote about here). Power to the peopleBut governments can only go so far in dictating norms, even in China. A case in point was the recent public backlash against Weibo, an online platform, after it started in April to delete posts about gay themes in an effort to “clean up”. The platform’s decision to reverse the policy, after the hashtag “I am homosexual” (which it at first also blocked) went viral, showed that even in China people can push back. The media too can help open up societies, or at least expose them to otherness. Let’s not be hypocrites; not every European is comfortable with all that is on display at Eurovision. But their governemnts don't try to stop them from tuning in. Countries such as Russia would love to follow China’s example. But the EBU has made it clear that it won't stand for censorious cherrypicking. On Weibo some people are discussing how badly the Chinese government’s decision reflects on China. As Nicki French, who represented Britain in the 2000 contest, said to the BBC last week: “Eurovision does more for international politics, and international relations, than any politician could do.” It fosters an open society, too.