IT NEVER does one well to declare a genre dead. It may grow stale, may ossify like bone, it may even seem to fade from view. But genres have a tendency to regenerate, too: the Western, for example, rides back into town against an explosion of creativity every ten years or so. At the beginning of this decade, obituaries poured forth for the romantic comedy. That similar articles had been written at the beginning of the 1990s—and were proved wrong by a near-golden age of rom-coms—seems not to have occurred to anyone. As serious long-form storytelling has migrated to the small screen, so, too, has the romantic comedy. With longer running times and multi-season arcs, characters have been allowed to develop more fully and ingratiate themselves with viewers more completely. In the same way that narrative drama has found ways to interrogate earlier forms—the deconstruction of the gangster film over seven seasons of “The Sopranos” remains the gold standard—so have the creators of romantic comedies found ways to tell stories that at once both critique and adhere to the genre’s essential formulae. Stephen Falk’s “You’re the Worst” (pictured top) is perhaps the finest example. From the meet cute and the grand gesture to the change of heart and “the rom-com monologue”, there isn’t a generic base the show hasn’t hit without simultaneously thumbing its nose at it. “Love”, Judd Apatow’s Netflix series, took a similar approach—originally, it seemed when the show first aired, rather too similar—only with a somewhat sweeter tone. Other shows have used the relative freedom of television to explore relationships unlikely to make it to the big screen. We might consider “You Me Her” (pictured below), about a polyamorous “thruple” navigating the intricacies of their situation; “Catastrophe”, about a mid-life one-night stand that leads to children and marriage; and “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend”, a show about a delusional stalker done up in the guise of a rom-com musical. The similarities between these shows are endless, but most important is how different they are from the generation of rom-coms that preceded them. Some are willing to drop comedy completely, not merely at the emotional climax—“I’m just a girl standing in front of a boy...”—but for episode-long stretches. They explore substance abuse and mental illness in deeply considered ways. Frank depictions of sex and sexuality abound (“10 Things I Hate About You” or “How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days” they ain’t). Indeed, perhaps the only thing they have in common with earlier rom-coms is the aforementioned meet cute, though these rarely adhere to the stipulation that they actually be cute. The protagonists of “You’re the Worst” meet outside a wedding from which one has been evicted and the other is stealing gifts. The other must-hit base—the happy ending—is no longer a given either, and in fact may be the rom-com convention that these shows seem most willing to buck. Even “Love”, which ends on a decidedly upbeat note, doesn’t succumb to the idea that everyone’s going to live “happily ever after”. Between Mickey’s recovery and Gus’s long-awaited acceptance of his own issues, there is an understanding that their situation remains precarious, and that their relationship is going to be contingent on their willingness to work on it. Between these poles lies the long second act that traditionally threatens to keep the protagonists apart. By virtue of their multi-season arcs, these second acts are particularly long on television, allowing the shows to explore complications in far greater depth and detail than any feature film. The second season of “You’re the Worst”, which deals with Gretchen’s clinical depression and Jimmy’s struggle to support her, would perhaps be given 20 minutes or so in a feature-length production. Here it takes a good, often harrowing, couple of hours. But such second acts, which can sometimes be two or three seasons long, also run the risk of fatigue. Teeter on the will-they-won’t-they question too long and you wind up with Ross and Rachel or Sam and Diane, which is to say something no one cares about any more. The requirements of the rom-com—even ones that chooses to end unhappily ever after—and the commercial imperative to continue making a show indefinitely are at odds with one another. The response of a show like “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” has been to be rebrand and refocus: in its third season the show turned its attentions to mental illness and treatment. “Catastrophe” looks set to go a similar way, its third season ending on an admission of alcoholism that one suspects will provide the focus for season four. Other shows attempt to stick to the relationship, to varying degrees of success. It’s still too early to say whether “You Me Her” will get over what, in its third season, began to feel like whole lot of wheel-spinning (thruple pulls apart, thruple gets back together, thruple looks set to get pulled apart again). The fifth and final season of “You’re the Worst” airs this year, with a wedding—or not—on the cards. The alternative would be to find new ways to reset its central relationship every season. The rom-com formula, if it demands anything at all, demands resolution. That means that these shows must have an end game in mind and be willing to embrace it sooner rather than later. For all the critique of the genre they contain—the meet cutes that aren’t, the Carey Grant types whose drinking is excessive—the demands of the rom-com are simply unavoidable. As “Love” understood and ultimately got right, relationships may not come to a head with a mad dash through New York on New Year’s Eve, or with someone facing his fear of heights to clamber up a Los Angeles fire escape, but they do eventually come to a head. They start or—as some of the new breed threaten—they end. The characters cannot be circling one another forever.