SITTING in the dark in his Blackpool bedsit, Harry Harper dialled 999. He told the operator that he had a bread knife at his throat and wanted to kill himself. Within minutes, blue flashing lights cut through the darkness and armed police broke down the door. A few years earlier, Mr Harper had been happily married and running a successful business. But after his wife committed suicide and his firm went bust, his life spiralled out of control. He started drinking and was admitted to a number of psychiatric hospitals. With little support, calling 999 became routine. Over six weeks he visited his local accident and emergency (A&E) unit 28 times. Mr Harper is not alone. Many people who feel overwhelmed by their personal problems come to use the emergency services as a crutch. Data from NHS England show that around 5,000 people attend major A&E units more than 20 times each year. In 2016 they accounted for 0.05% of A&E visitors, but about 3% of spending, or £53m ($78m). They probably account for a similarly outsized share of ambulance call-outs and hospital-admissions costs. Some doctors nickname them “frequent flyers” (one manager suggests that “power users” might be less insensitive). Most regions have no strategy for dealing with these patients. In some places, frequent callers have been cut off from the ambulance service, or sent letters reprimanding them for wasting NHS money. Some have even been served with anti-social behaviour orders, which, when broken, result in jail time. The health service is not geared up to treat non-medical problems, says Mark Sage, a doctor who plays a role in commissioning health services in west Kent. If severe stress triggers abdominal pains for a patient, for instance, an A&E doctor may prescribe pills to relieve the symptom. But he is unlikely to try to fix the cause of the problem. Now a promising scheme aims to offer more effective help to the most frequent users, thereby reducing their reliance on the emergency services. It was started in 2013 by Rhian Monteith, then a paramedic in Blackpool, where health outcomes are among the worst in Britain. She asked local NHS managers for the names of the area’s most frequently seen patients, and was handed a list of 23 people, including Mr Harper. Many, like him, were middle-aged folk with mental-health problems. Between them they had visited A&E 703 times in the previous three months, mostly by ambulance. Ms Monteith tried to give them a sense of “social inclusion and purpose”. She mentored them on the phone or over coffee. Often they talked about their social needs, rather than their medical symptoms. So she arranged community activities, like volunteer work, and help with practical matters such as applying for benefits. Those who often got worked up to a crisis point were taught coping mechanisms. All were given Ms Monteith’s phone number and encouraged to call her instead of the emergency services. The effect was quick and dramatic. Within months, A&E attendances, 999 calls and hospital admissions all dropped by about 90% among the group. And over time, they came to call Ms Monteith less often. Many began to put their lives back together. Mr Harper attended therapy. He says he is much happier now and plans to become a motorbike instructor. The model was extended to about 300 patients in Blackpool over the following three years, saving the NHS over £2m. In 2017 it was rolled out by 36 of England’s 195 regional NHS commissioning groups. The NHS is evaluating the scheme; if it considers it a success, it may be extended nationwide in the autumn. Implementing the programme is not without difficulty. Many of the most prolific users of A&E have no fixed address or are homeless. And they must agree to their data being shared across different government agencies, which is sometimes a hard sell. NHS managers fear that those who run the initiative, like Ms Monteith, may burn out or be bombarded with calls. “It’s important to set boundaries,” says Jill Whibley, a nurse who leads the programme in west Kent. But the evidence so far is encouraging. The most recent winter crisis revealed just how stretched A&E departments are. Rerouting frequent flyers to the appropriate services would benefit besieged doctors and paramedics, as well as the patients themselves.