“LE MORTE D’ARTHUR”, a 15th-century collection of stories about King Arthur and his knights, may be the finest depiction of courtly romance in any language. It contains some of the loveliest prose ever written in English. Its authorship is somewhat murky: it is attributed to Thomas Malory, but there is some dispute as to which of several men of that name actually wrote it. The likeliest candidate probably scribbled parts of the book in prison, where he was confined more than once in a criminal career that took in accusations of theft, attempted murder and rape. Those circumstances have not stopped “Le Morte d’Arthur” featuring on many university curriculums. Malory’s sins—whatever they were and whoever he was—have been forgotten. Junot Díaz is one of the most original writers of fiction in America. He has two intellectual assets that all great novelists need. He has something to write about—in his case, the experience of being a Dominican immigrant to America, and the fraught gender politics of the Dominican community. And, as “The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao” and “This Is How You Lose Her” demonstrate, he has a style that is his own—a lexicon and syntax combining deep learning with demotic Spanglish and pop culture. In recent weeks Mr Díaz has been accused of misbehaviour that chimes with the machismo he depicts in his stories. In one instance an author says Mr Díaz forcibly kissed her six years ago when she was a graduate student. Another woman says he promised to help her writing career, but that—after she went to bed with him—he treated her badly and never did. But in the main the accusations involve rudeness, allegedly tinged with misogyny. He is said to have ranted at a questioner at a book event and yelled at a woman at a dinner party. “I take responsibility for my past,” Mr Díaz commented. As it happens, he said something similar in an article in the New Yorker, published shortly before the furore began, in which he described the legacy of being raped as a child. “I think about the hurt I caused,” Mr Díaz wrote. “Eventually the past finds you.” Some shops in America have announced that they will no longer stock his books. Like the rest of the human race, only slightly more so, artists and writers are not always nice people. But how much does that matter? This issue —how far readers and audiences should let an artist’s life influence attitudes to his art—has become especially pressing in the wake of the Weinstein scandal, and the grisly revelations and re-evaluations that have followed. The contrasting examples of Malory and Mr Díaz point to the swirl of factors that affects these calculations. There are three main variables. First, time: how long ago the alleged misdeeds occurred and whether the artist is still alive. Second, the gravity of the offences. Third, the quality and importance of the artist’s output. Many people will tolerate in a genius something they would never countenance in a hack. The trouble with these criteria is that all of them are changeable and subjective. Time passes and memories fade. The hierarchy of different sorts of wrongdoing shifts, not only across decades but in different places at the same moment. Tastes vary and evolve. Many people love and revere the films of Woody Allen—at least, they loved them until allegations of sexual misconduct corroded his reputation too. Other people never got him. Nobody knows for sure whether anyone will still be watching “Manhattan”, or reading Mr Díaz, in 100 years. It is a fair bet that they will still be reading Malory. This instability does not mean the world should whitewash, say, Roman Polanski’s past (the director fled America to dodge a sentence for statutory rape). It is not to diminish the importance of the #MeToo campaign or the abuses it has publicised. It is not a counsel of relativism: campaigners are right to say that sexual harassment has never been right or forgivable, even if it was indeed forgiven by other men, just as, say, the anti-Semitism of Ezra Pound or Richard Wagner was always obnoxious. It is nauseating to see abusive men lionised and celebrated. But lionising a writer or musician or filmmaker is not the same thing as exposing yourself to his work. And, in truth, there is not, and can never be, a fixed rule for deciding what, in an artist’s biography, counts as disqualifying for his art. (An exception may be when offences are committed in the creation of the art itself, as they seem to have been on some film sets.) That being so, removing books from shelves or school curriculums is both mistaken and patronising. It may or may not deprive people of art that would enrich their lives; it certainly deprives them of the chance to make up their own minds. Dig deeper: #MeToo, Hollywood after Harvey Weinstein, sexual harassment