THE sudden death on May 3rd of Afonso Dhlakama (pictured), the long-standing leader of the opposition Renamo movement, is a momentous event for Mozambique. Mr Dhlakama, who is said to have died of kidney failure in his hideout in the rugged centre of the country, had been a thorn in the side of the ruling Frelimo party for nearly 40 years. But his unexpected demise at the age of 65 is not likely to give President Filipe Nyusi much respite. “Mozambique is back,” said Mr Nyusi at a recent gathering of fellow Commonwealth leaders in London, hoping to persuade them that the buffeting his country has faced in the past few years is over. But his compatriots need convincing, too. Some point to dramatic changes in the three countries most closely tied to Mozambique—South Africa, Zimbabwe and Angola. Each has a new leader who vows to correct the bad habits of a recently ejected predecessor. Why, they ask, can’t Mr Nyusi, who succeeded Armando Guebuza in 2015, do the same? Mr Nyusi has three hard tasks. First, he must accommodate Renamo, which may not be any easier with Mr Dhlakama gone. It is unclear who will take over as its leader: a daughter, Maria Soares, who heads Renamo’s caucus in Mozambique’s parliament, may be a contender. Founded in 1975, Renamo fought a guerrilla war from 1977 to 1992 against Mr Nyusi’s formerly Marxist Frelimo, which has run the show since independence from Portugal in 1975. Renamo rebelled again more recently, though there has been a shaky truce since the end of 2016. Second, Mr Nyusi must revive the economy by coming to terms with the IMF and foreign donors who suspended aid soon after a scandal involving $2bn of secret loans was exposed in 2016. Third, Mr Nyusi must chuck out and in some cases bring to book the old guard around Mr Guebuza, reputed to be one of Mozambique’s richest men. Mr Nyusi has done best with Renamo. He had courageously met Mr Dhlakama in his hideout. Indeed, he was close to clinching a deal on devolution that would let Renamo share or win power in some provinces, whose governors, previously appointed by the president, will in future be elected, if the emerging accord is upheld. But the two leaders were still negotiating over how to demobilise and reintegrate their armed men. Mr Nyusi was hoping that all would be settled before national elections next year, though some in Frelimo still hankered after a “Savimbi solution”: that Mr Dhlakama would just be killed, as was Angola’s rebel leader, Jonas Savimbi, in 2002. So far there have been no accusations that foul play caused Mr Dhlakama’s death. On the economic front, Mr Nyusi is shakier. The high hopes that followed the discovery of vast reserves of gas in 2010 are far from fulfilment; large-scale production is not expected before the mid-2020s. The IMF has yet to be reassured that its requested funds will not be squandered. Mr Nyusi waffles about sorting out the mess with the banks involved in the loan scandal. And he has not done enough to dislodge his party’s corrupt old guard, as his counterpart in Angola seems to be doing. He has brought a few allies into the ruling politburo and sacked the head of the army and the intelligence service. But he is somewhat hamstrung by his lack of pedigree among the generals; he is the first president of an independent Mozambique not to have fought in the liberation war. “Mr Dhlakama is not our enemy, he is my brother,” said Mr Nyusi a fortnight before his rival’s death. “Our enemy is corruption.” If that is indeed the case, victory is still a long way off.