AS WITH many important cases that go before the Supreme Court, the facts underpinning Lucia v Securities and Exchange Commission would hardly seem to justify attention. Raymond Lucia ran an investment business, which included his “Buckets of Money” promotional lectures. The SEC, the main Wall Street regulator, considered these deceptive and in 2013 revoked Mr Lucia’s investment-adviser registration. Mr Lucia objects. What transformed the case into something more than a nuanced squabble was Mr Lucia’s claim that not only was the punishment unfair but so too was the forum in which the SEC delivered it. America’s federal structure rests on three pillars: a congress to enact laws, an executive to administer them, and a judiciary to settle disputes. While in practice these divisions have never been entirely clean, circumstances have become muddier with the rise of agencies like the SEC that have gained sweeping authority over American life. Their employees are largely removed from the electoral process, but nonetheless create rules, police them and arbitrate disputes. The SEC’s enforcement division traditionally brings cases to a federal court directly or in conjunction with the justice department. But it can also adjudicate matters itself using administrative law judges (ALJs) who work for the SEC. It was before one of these that Mr Lucia found himself in 2012. According to an analysis by Alexander Platt, a lawyer, the SEC increasingly prefers to adjudicate matters itself. From 2006 to 2014, the number of cases it brought to federal court each year fell from over 200 to under 150. The number it took to ALJs rose from around 350 to more than 600. The SEC may prefer its home turf as a legal venue not only because of the notable decisions delivered against it in federal court, but also because of the expanded powers it was granted by the Dodd-Frank Act after the financial crisis. But it is a more fundamental issue that brought Mr Lucia’s case to the Supreme Court: how the SEC’s judges are selected. The SEC can draw from other agencies or from the federal government’s human-resources department. This is permissible if the Supreme Court rules that the judges are mere employees, but not if they are government officers with significant discretion. In that case the constitution requires them to be chosen by the president (as with federal judges) or by department heads who run the agency. While the second approach introduces political considerations, it also ensures accountability. After all, the absence of external politics does not, by itself, assure independence. An amicus brief filed by the New Civil Liberties Alliance, a non-profit group, asserts that the SEC, in effect, gamed the civil-service process to obtain sympathetic judges, and that another agency, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, was similarly adept in using the rules to dump a judge it found to be too independent. There are around 150 judges of this sort spread throughout government agencies, according to a statement made at the Supreme Court. This has broadened interest in the Lucia case, and, along with the underlying issues, placed it at the centre of a debate over the “deep state”—the structure that some see as ensuring a competent, disinterested public service and that others see as protecting an undemocratic, incompetent, self-serving elite. Are there limits to what agencies should be permitted to do? Should the administration of justice stand alone? Has the balance of powers—the foundation of the American system—been circumvented by a shift in the structure of America’s government? The justices of the Supreme Court will have no illusion about the potential breadth of the case. A ruling is expected during the summer, and while the court may avoid being disruptive, it would be no surprise if some of the opinions offered are particularly far-reaching, setting a marker for more challenges to come.