TOM WOLFE’s great achievement was to write prose as big as America. Mr Wolfe thought that America’s literary elite were missing the biggest story on earth—their own country. Ensconced in their Manhattan lofts and writer-in-residence programmes they were fixated on the minor doings of their own caste rather than the mega-doings of the people who inhabited the American sub-continent. “At this weak, pale, tabescent moment in the history of American literature,” Mr Wolfe wrote in one of his manifestos, “we need a battalion, a brigade, of Zolas to head out into this wild, bizarre, unpredictable, hog-stomping, Baroque country of ours and reclaim it as literary property.” Mr Wolfe combined a disdain for the myopia of America’s literary caste with contempt for their politics. During his time as a PhD student at Yale University he came to the conclusion that America’s upper-middle class is more interested in what is now called virtue-signalling than in understanding the world. And he exploited this insight in a succession of brilliant pen-portraits of the 1960s such as “Radical Chic”, which portrayed Leonard Bernstein and his smart friends treating the Black Panthers to champagne and canapés, and “Mau-Mauing the Flak Catchers”, which showed how professional agitators exaggerated their problems in order to extract resources from state bureaucrats. This might all sound a bit backward-looking: reactionary chic rather than radical chic. But Mr Wolfe was also on the cutting edge of the so-called New Journalism that exploded onto the scene in the 1960s along with sex, drugs and rock and roll. Mr Wolfe travelled with Ken Kesey, one of the apostles of psychedelic drugs, and captured the experience in “The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test” (1968). He hung out with Hells Angels, hot-rod racers, and other fashionable misfits. To chronicle the 1960s he developed a bizarre prose style that merrily broke all the rules of good writing, littering the page with capital letters, exclamation marks, italics and single-sentence paragraphs. He also turned himself into a figure who was as distinctive as his prose style, dressing in a white suite and Homburg hat and carrying a cane. The best example of Mr Wolfe’s journalism was an exercise in hero-worship rather than debunking: his wonderful book about the pilots who became America’s first astronauts, “The Right Stuff” (1979). These were real Americans for the man in the white suit: not bureaucrats spending other people’s money or drop-outs tuning in and turning-off, but brave men who were willing to push their bodies to the limit in order to do their job without whingeing about their suffering or boasting about their exploits. Real heroism was still possible even in the age of narcissism and self-pity. In 1981 Mr Wolfe gave up journalism in order to focus on novel-writing. The best of his novels was the first. “Bonfire of the Vanities” (1987) captured the spirit of Manhattan in the 1980s—and became a commercial success and cultural lightning rod as a result. “Bonfire” dwelt on how thin the veneer of civilisation had become: take one wrong turn and a glittering career can be turned to dust. It also created an immortal anti-hero in the form of the Reverend Bacon, a black politician who uses any excuse to engage in agitprop and race-baiting. The left hated the novel because of its repeated references to “the Third World” that was apparently at the door of smart society. The ascendant Reaganite right loved it. Mr Wolfe’s subsequent novels never achieved those heights. “A Man in Full” (1998) was a missed opportunity: as a Southerner Mr Wolfe realised that the rise of the Sun Belt was the great unchronicled story of his time. But his novel about the nouveaux riches in Atlanta, Georgia, never quite succeeded in capturing the spirit of the New South. The prose style became a bit wearisome: “Quail! The aristocrat of American wild game! It was what the grouse and the pheasant were in England and Scotland and Europe—only better!”). The novel also suffered from being overshadowed by reality: eight years after it was published Dick Cheney shot another quail-hunter in the face while hunting quail down South—and then failed to tell the president about his mishap. Another novel, “I Am Charlotte Simmons” (2004), also failed to live up to its promise. The book poked fun at the macho culture of an elite university that was closely modelled on the would-be Princeton of the South, Duke. It made a good job of pointing to the contradictions of America’s universities: unisex lavatories and other politically correct fads, on the one hand, and macho jock culture on the other. But Mr Wolfe never really captured the sensibilities of a young woman. And again reality trumped fiction: Duke University was the scene of a scandal involving lacrosse players, strippers and false charges of rape. But Mr Wolfe at his best was nevertheless a unique force in American writing. He developed an unforgettable style. He coined immortal phrases such as “radical chic” and “the me decade”. He skewered some notably silly people. Mr Wolfe not only chronicled his “wild, bizarre, unpredictable, hog-stomping, Baroque country” in a torrent of vivid prose. He did as much as any other writer of his generation to shape that culture by subjecting his own class to a withering critique.