FEW had expected the ceasefire in trade hostilities between America and China to last. But no one predicted such a sudden demise. On May 29th the White House announced plans to slap 25% tariffs on $50bn of imports from China, reversing its position of less than two weeks ago, when it placed tariffs “on hold” as trade talks progressed. The announcement could in theory give America leverage in negotiations, which are set to resume this weekend when Wilbur Ross, America’s commerce secretary, visits Beijing. China reacted with frustration. Xinhua, the state-run news agency, said the Trump administration had gone back on its word and was undermining American credibility. The commerce ministry pledged that China would defend its national interests. How worried should China be? Uncertainty about what exactly America might do complicates any assessment of the threat to China. President Donald Trump has blown hot and cold on China, some days tweeting that he wants to get tough and other days touting his great relationship (as he sees it) with Xi Jinping, China’s leader. The American move that most shocked China happened in April when it banned ZTE, a major Chinese telecom company, from buying American parts in a sanctions dispute. However Mr Trump, much to the anger of China hawks in Washington, then called for a lighter punishment. This week’s announcement of tariffs also gives him room to back down. The list of affected products is due to be published on June 15th, with the duties imposed “shortly thereafter”. The Chinese commerce ministry described it as a tactical statement, hinting at its belief that Mr Trump might be bluffing. Nevertheless, Chinese officials know that it would be foolhardy to downplay the dangers. Looked at narrowly, China’s economy could easily absorb the impact of $50bn in tariffs. But the fear is that they would be the start of a much nastier trade war. China has vowed to retaliate with an equivalent amount of tariffs. That could prompt Mr Trump to levy yet more duties. Since China runs a huge bilateral trade surplus ($375bn last year), it can only go so far in a tit-for-tat tariff battle. But it can target American businesses in China, by organising consumer boycotts or disrupting their factories. And America could also do more: China’s tech sector relies on American firms for semi-conductors and is thus vulnerable to export controls. If the fight escalates, the damage to business confidence and supply chains in China and America would be severe. So the assumption in Beijing, and in global markets, is that a full-fledged trade war will be avoided. Indeed, before Mr Trump’s latest tariff threat, the two countries seemed to be edging towards a deal in which China would commit to buying more American goods, from beef to natural gas, in order to reduce its trade surplus. That would not be the end of the story, though. As China grows more powerful, its rivalry with America is heating up. The trade spat is just the most visible of the economic spillovers. Chinese firms already face a tough approval process when investing in America. The White House is now drawing up even tighter investment restrictions. It also plans to shorten visa durations for Chinese students in fields such as robotics and aviation, worried that they might be stealing American intellectual property. And there is broad support from both Republicans and Democrats for the American government to take a harder line in opposing Chinese industrial policies. China has ways to push back. It is working to deepen economic ties with other countries and is opening its door a little wider to foreign businesses, partly in a bid to cultivate more goodwill. It is also redoubling efforts to develop its own technology, notably with large state-backed investments in the semiconductor industry. But there is no escaping the rise in Sino-American competition. Even if the tariffs fizzle out, other storms lie ahead.