AMERICA has executed just nine people so far this year. That figure tracks a sharp decline in the use of capital punishment since 1999, when a record 98 inmates were put to death. But the Supreme Court is still called upon to weigh in on eleventh-hour appeals and other death-sentence challenges. On April 30th, the justices agreed to hear the case of Russell Bucklew, a Missouri inmate whose rare medical condition, cavernous hemangioma, could make his planned lethal injection a torturous experience in violation of the Eighth Amendment’s ban on “cruel and unusual punishments”. The justices put a hold on Mr Bucklew’s execution on March 20th, but it was a close call. Four justices—Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, Clarence Thomas and John Roberts, the chief—would have let the lethal injection go forward, while the four liberal-leaning justices and Justice Anthony Kennedy blocked it for the time being. That suggests the court will be similarly split in the autumn when they take up Bucklew v Precythe. No matter what the condemned man’s fate, the briefs and oral argument preceding the ruling will be an exercise in parsing the wrenching details that confront the justices whenever they “tinker with the machinery of death”, as the late Justice Harry Blackmun put it. He turned against capital punishment as he was leaving the bench in 1994. Mr Bucklew was sentenced to death in the wake of several heinous crimes that he committed in 1996 after his girlfriend, Stephanie Ray, left him. Mr Bucklew “slashed her face with a knife, beat her and threatened to kill her”, a court filing  from Missouri says. Then he tracked her down, killed the owner of the home where she was staying, fired shots at her young son and raped her. Later, after escaping from jail, he went after Ms Ray’s mother with a hammer. A Missouri jury found him guilty on multiple counts and dispatched him to death row. The controversy in his case arises because a fraught method of execution, lethal injection, may be made even more complicated by the “unstable, blood-filled tumours” that plague his head, neck and throat. Mr Bucklew worries that if the execution impairs his breathing, a tumour in his throat could bleed, suffocating him for several minutes before the lethal injection kills him. The execution carries a significant risk, he says, of being far more “gruesome and painful” than ordinary lethal injections. Since the Supreme Court decided Glossip v Gross in 2015, inmates must do more than argue that a particular execution protocol could cause undue pain. According to that 5-4 ruling by Justice Samuel Alito, they must “identify a known and available alternative method of execution that entails a lesser risk of pain”. It may fall on Mr Bucklew, then, to show that Missouri has a viable way to kill him that is demonstrably less liable to cause him excruciating pain than would lethal injection. There is such a method, Mr Bucklew’s lawyers say: the gas chamber. Under Missouri’s plans, he will suffer greatly “while lying flat and choking on his tumour and blood leaking from it” but this “definitely will not happen if Missouri uses lethal gas”. There are several problems with this proposal, Missouri replies. First, even according to Mr Bucklew’s expert witness, “there’s no way to tell if nitrogen gas would not be cruel”. Some research shows that hypoxia, or oxygen deprivation, “entails significant suffering” akin to the pain of a heart attack during which the offender may “begin to drool, urinate, defecate or vomit”, remaining conscious all the while. Second, though gassing is on the books in Missouri, the state hasn’t used the method since 1965. “The state’s only gas chamber not only is inoperable”, Missouri tells the justices, “it sits in a museum”. Weighing in on Mr Bucklew’s side, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) says the inmate should not be required to identify “an available alternative” method of execution given that his challenge is based on an “idiosyncratic” medical condition and does not question the use of lethal injection generally. The ACLU asks the Supreme Court to  “avert another botched execution” by ruling that inmates with “particular compromised health conditions” have a constitutional right not to be subjected to “needless pain and suffering”. Sometime after October 1st, the first day of the next term, the justices will sit and contemplate these grim questions. In the meantime, Mr Bucklew remains on death row—but safe for now from the state’s deadly drug cocktail.