The Age of Eisenhower: America and the World in the 1950s. By William Hitchcock. Simon & Schuster; 672 pages; $35 Eisenhower vs. Warren: The Battle for Civil Rights and Liberties. By James F. Simon. Liveright; 448 pages; $35 MANY Americans, especially white ones, think of the 1950s with gauzy nostalgia. Living standards rose as the economy soared. Televisions and interstate highways spread. The Korean war ended; the culture wars had yet to begin. Optimism reigned. Presiding over this seeming utopia was Dwight Eisenhower. The victorious Allied commander in Europe in the second world war, Eisenhower represented a new era—the first Republican elected president since Herbert Hoover and the Great Depression. His sunny persona and Kansas-boy-made-good story matched the times, and Americans approved of his performance. Two new books offer important corrections to such sentimentalism. The more important is William Hitchcock’s “The Age of Eisenhower”, which lays to rest the widespread notion that Eisenhower was a laissez-faire, golf-crazed president swept along by the times. In Mr Hitchcock’s authoritative verdict, Eisenhower valued world peace and prosperity and sought (often successfully) to rise above partisan politics. But he also immensely expanded the military-industrial complex that he warned about in his farewell address. Mr Hitchcock makes clear the perils of the early cold war. On numerous occasions Eisenhower toyed with the idea of dropping nuclear bombs to sway foreign conflicts. He saw them as “simply another weapon in our arsenal”, according to Omar Bradley, a military adviser. He considered using nukes to jolt the stalemate in Korea (happily the Soviets and North Koreans made peace overtures after Josef Stalin’s death). The Central Intelligence Agency grew rapidly, overthrowing governments, or trying to, from Iran to Guatemala to Cuba. Yet Eisenhower avoided war with the Soviet Union and handled the crisis over the Suez Canal, in 1956, “with assurance and wisdom”. At home there were disappointments amid the general prosperity. Eisenhower failed to challenge the anti-Communist demagogue Joseph McCarthy publicly (though he did work quietly to undermine him). His record on the most important question of the era—civil rights—was mixed. Harry Truman, his predecessor, had begun the desegregation of the armed forces, and Eisenhower quickly moved to continue the process. He also worked to root out segregation in the federal jurisdiction of Washington, DC. But his general view was fatalistic: “I do not believe we can cure all the evils in men’s hearts by laws.” When, in 1954, the Supreme Court ordered desegregation of the nation’s schools in Brown v Board of Education, his response was limp: “I am sworn to uphold the constitutional process in this country—and I will obey.” In “Eisenhower vs Warren” James Simon, a law professor and historian, focuses squarely on Brown. He explains how Earl Warren, the chief justice and Eisenhower’s first Supreme Court appointee, corralled his colleagues into a unanimous decision despite being new to the court and having never previously served as a judge. A year after its initial decision, the court famously ordered the obstreperous South to comply “with all deliberate speed”. Mr Simon is an engaging storyteller, even if he offers few surprising insights into the relationship between the two men. Mostly he presents their stories in parallel; only occasionally do they interact. In this telling Eisenhower tried to duck the moral force of the Brown decision and was said to bitterly regret his appointment of Warren. (In private, Warren recalled, Eisenhower said he sympathised with southerners who did not want their “sweet little girls” to share classrooms with “big overgrown Negroes”.) Only after a few weeks’ delay did the president act over the crisis in Little Rock in 1957, sending troops to help nine black children go to school. For all that, the Eisenhower presidency has aged well. In 1962 a poll of historians placed Eisenhower 20th in the all-time rankings; last year, a similar poll put him fifth. Though a gradualist on civil rights, he did not block progress. From today’s perspective he appears an upstanding Republican president, who balanced the budget, managed international affairs steadily—and obeyed the law.