WITH embers from the firestorm over his nomination battle still aglow, Brett Kavanaugh participated in his first hearings as a Supreme Court justice on October 9th. Demonstrators gathered outside the building, but in the courtroom oral arguments went on as planned—unmarred by protest or passion. The justices were even more collegial with one another than usual. Bridging ideological divides, Justice Sonia Sotomayor mock-pinched Justice Neil Gorsuch; Justice Elena Kagan chatted amiably with Justice Kavanaugh, whom she hired years ago when serving as dean of Harvard Law School. No signs of partisan rancour haunted the hearings. At the strike of the gavel, Chief Justice John Roberts opened the proceedings, wished the junior justice a “long and happy career in our common calling” and the nine settled down to business. The cordial beginning to Justice Kavanaugh’s new career caps a Republican quest five decades in the making to lock down a dependable conservative majority on America’s highest court. It’s a wonder it has taken the GOP so long. Since 1969, Republican presidents have appointed all but four of the 18 justices to win confirmation. The quartet of Democratic appointees are still on the bench: two octogenarians (Ruth Bader Ginsburg, 85 and Stephen Breyer, 80), Justice Sotomayor (64) and Justice Kagan (58). Five of the 14 Republican appointees drifted noticeably to the left after joining the court, including three who became so-called “swing” justices—more often siding with conservatives but joining the liberals for key rulings. Lewis Powell and, later, Sandra Day O’Connor occupied this role from the 1970s to the middle of the last decade. The most recent swing justice was Anthony Kennedy, the man whose seat Justice Kavanaugh now occupies and who sat in the audience in the courtroom on October 9th. In the short run, the 114th justice’s impact will not be earth-shaking. Though Justice Kavanaugh stands to the right of Justice Kennedy, for whom he clerked in 1993-94, his old boss was no leftie. Justice Kennedy voted to make George W. Bush president in Bush v Gore (2000), ease campaign-finance regulations in Citizens United v FEC (2008) and gut the Voting Rights Act in Shelby County v Holder (2013). In his 30th and final term, Justice Kennedy did not make a majority with the liberal bloc even once, so it may be difficult to see how Justice Kavanaugh could be any worse for progressives. A docket of smaller-stakes cases this year also limits the potential impact of Justice Kavanaugh’s ascent to the Supreme Court. The justices get to pick which cases they hear, and thus far this term they have steered clear of hot-button issues likely to divide them ideologically. Given the anger on both sides of the aisle during the confirmation hearings, and the bare-knuckle partisan light in which the court was cast, the justices may be relieved, for now, to leave legal flashpoints for another day. But the justices cannot avoid controversy for long, and the newly entrenched right-leaning majority will eventually find an appetite for cases with openings to push American law in their direction. Justice Kavanaugh may not vote to overrule Obergefell v Hodges, the landmark ruling Justice Kennedy penned in 2015 opening marriage laws to same-sex couples. But his record suggests he’ll be receptive to county clerks, bakers, pharmacists and others who say their conscience prohibits them from doing business with gay and lesbian people. Justice Kavanaugh will be more likely than his predecessor to permit states to curtail abortion access—voting to undercut, if not overrule, Roe v Wade (1973)—and less likely to use “evolving standards of decency” to narrow the classes of criminals eligible for the death penalty. Whereas Justice Kennedy saved affirmative action in 2016, Justice Kavanaugh will probably vote to bar public (and perhaps private) universities from considering race in admissions. His scepticism of the regulatory leeway enjoyed by agencies like the Environmental Protection Agency and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau may roll back the work of the administrative state. At 53, once he gets going, Donald Trump’s second Supreme Court pick may help redefine America for decades to come.