In this two-part series, our correspondents explore the debates about market power, concentration and monopoly. On Wednesday we look at America, Mexico and Britain. On Friday we turn our attention to China and Japan. Competition in America: Where capitalism has become far less healthy AMERICA’S airlines used to be famous for two things: terrible service and worse finances. Today flyers still endure hidden fees, late flights, bruised knees, clapped-out fittings and sub-par food. Yet airlines now make juicy profits. Scheduled passenger airlines reported an after-tax net profit of $15.5bn in 2017, up from $14bn in 2016. What is true of the airline industry is increasingly true of America’s economy. Profits have risen in most rich countries over the past ten years but the increase has been biggest for American firms. Coupled with an increasing concentration of ownership, this means the fruits of economic growth are being monopolised. High profits across a whole economy can be a sign of sickness. They can signal the existence of firms more adept at siphoning wealth off than creating it, such as those that exploit monopolies. If companies capture more profits than they can spend, it can lead to a shortfall of demand. Ordinary people pay higher prices than they should, for worse service. The Economist published a big article on the competitive-intensity of capitalism in 2016. It focused on America. The piece divided the economy into around 900 sectors covered by America’s five-yearly economic census. Two-thirds of them became more concentrated between 1997 and 2012. The weighted average share of the top four firms in each sector rose from 26% to 32%. Since that article, more and more academics have become interested in the issue. The latest meeting of the world’s central bankers in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, was stuffed with sessions about how capitalism has become less competitive. Wonks are talking about how to make things better. Some favour a serious effort to remove the red tape and occupational-licensing schemes that strangle small businesses and deter new entrants. Others examine a loosening of the rules that give too much protection to some intellectual-property rights. However most of the debate has focused on America when it is increasingly a global problem. So as part of the Open Future initiative, we wish to focus a spotlight on how the debate is playing out in other parts of the world. What becomes clear is that as the lack of competition in capitalism become a more important question in other countries, exactly what this means varies from place to place. *        *       * Competition in Mexico: Improving markets is boring but vital work MEXICO has emphatically elected a man who tells voters that society is rigged against them. Andrés Manuel López Obrador, who will become Mexico’s next president on December 1st, describes a “mafia of power” which controls political and economic life in the country and keeps ordinary Mexicans down. This is partly a rhetorical term for anyone that Mr López Obrador does not get along with. But it also resonates because Mexicans sense that the economy is stacked against them, a big part of which is the weak level of competition. Under Enrique Peña Nieto, voters endured near-daily headlines filled with tales of corruption. Much of it concerned the 230,000 or so government contracts doled out each year. Just 12% of them are tendered publicly; many go to cronies rather than the most suitable bidders. This often leads to Mexican consumers facing poor options and high prices. But the problem of competition goes beyond government contracts. Santiago Levy, a Mexican economist, argues that well-intended government regulation allows too many weak, unproductive small businesses to survive, hindering the growth of bigger, more productive firms. Historically large sectors of Mexico’s economy, such as energy and telecommunications, were controlled by a single firm. A recent review by Cofece, Mexico’s new federal competition commission, suggested that weak competition laws force Mexicans to spend an extra 2.5bn pesos ($135m) each year on generic drugs than they otherwise would. A basic basket of goods costs Mexicans 30% more than it would under perfect competition, reckons Viridiana Ríos, a civil-society campaigner. Ironically, the much-maligned Mr Peña made inroads against this lack of competition. He established Cofece and charged it with promoting competition in Mexico. His energy reforms have attracted foreign investment into the oil sector for the first time since the 1930s; they compete with each other for contracts through a public, transparent procurement process. Reforms to the telecoms sector in 2013 brought new players into the Mexican market and sent prices plummeting. The cost of mobile broadband, 30% above the OECD average in 2013, was 30% below average by 2016. Mr López Obrador holds a deep, sincere concern for the poor, but he tends to favour bringing change through the example of his own personal magnetism instead of slow, unglamorous institution-building. After his landslide election victory, Cofece publicly proposed a joint plan to weed out corruption in the public procurement process. If Mr López Obrador wants to stick it to Mexico’s mafia of power, that would be a great place to start. *        *       * Competition in Britain: Main parties agree that capitalism is rigged THERE is growing suspicion in Britain that capitalism is not working as it should. Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of the Labour Party, says that capitalism is “rigged”, a word also used by Michael Gove, a prominent Conservative cabinet minister. They have a point. The biggest firms across a range of industries in Britain have more market power than they used to. That clout may allow them to charge higher prices for poor service, and pay lower wages. Dividing the British economy into 250-odd sub-industries, from management consultancy to private security, The Economist calculates that over the past decade 55% of these sectors have become more concentrated, with the four biggest firms accounting for a larger share of revenue than before. Other calculations find much the same results. A recent paper looks at the pricing power of a sample of British firms. The researchers examine mark-ups (ie, selling prices divided by production costs). Since the 1980s the average mark-up in Britain has risen by more than in Europe or North America. What explains the increasing concentration seen in Britain? Mergers may be one explanation. In the past 20 years Britain has seen about $5trn-worth of mergers and acquisitions of domestic firms. Adjusting for the size of its economy, that is nearly 50% more than in America. It is less clear how concentration affects workers. Evidence from America suggests that as firms become more powerful they can get away with offering lower wages, since workers have fewer alternative employers. Across Britain as a whole, the biggest firms actually employ a lower share of employees than in the early 2000s. In parts of the country, however, workers do appear to have fewer options than before. Whatever the explanation, wages as a share of GDP have fallen during the same period. Establishment types are finally starting to grapple with this issue. Liz Truss, a Conservative minister, frets about things like occupational regulation. Andy Haldane of the Bank of England recently gave a speech in which he worried about market power. But the debate is far less advanced than it is in America. Serious solutions could be a long way off.