ROMANIA’S monarchy has been defunct since 1947. But the royal family still enjoys much of the associated pageantry. It hosts events in the fairy-tale Peles Castle, once its home, now a museum. Two years ago the dynasty’s 150th anniversary was celebrated with substantial pomp: soldiers presenting arms, a regimental band, and aeroplanes leaving smoke trails in the national colours. Many Romanians still take an interest in royal affairs. Last December tens of thousands lined the streets of Bucharest to watch the spectacular state funeral given to the last king, Michael. Members of several foreign royal families attended. After King Michael’s death, the parliament discussed a bill to grant the head of the royal house the same status as that of former heads of state. It also toyed with the idea of a referendum on restoring the monarchy (a poll showed that some 70% of the public want the issue put to a popular vote), but never moved forward with it. For many centuries Romanians were ruled by local princes, as well as by the Ottoman, Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires. In 1881 the newly united country’s parliament asked the ruling prince, a German named Carol Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, to be its first modern king. On his death his nephew, Ferdinand, inherited the throne. And when King Ferdinand died his five-year-old grandson, Michael, became king. The boy’s dissipated father, who had previously renounced his rights to the throne, returned to reclaim the crown in 1930 as King Carol II, but was forced out of the country again in 1940. Michael became king a second time, but abdicated seven years later under pressure from the communists, and spent the next four decades in Switzerland. He returned after the fall of the Ceausescu regime, but was never restored as head of state. His oldest daughter, Margareta, is the current “Custodian of the Romanian Crown”. Many Romanians are nostalgic about their short-lived royal dynasty. At King Michael’s funeral, shouts of “down with communism” alluded to the king’s opposing of communism in the 1940s. Spreading support for the royals may be linked to growing disgust at the corruption scandals besetting Romanian politics. In 2017 after the newly elected Social Democrats sought to decriminalise certain acts of corruption by officials, Romanians responded with the largest protests since the anti-communist revolution of 1989. This summer demonstrations returned over low wages and entrenched corruption. The National Alliance for the Restoration of the Monarchy, a youth organisation, optimistically uses the slogan “the monarchy will save Romania”. The family itself, however, looks unlikely to play a central role in any royal revival. Much of its press coverage focuses on the interminable squabble over the line of succession. And there is much to squabble over. The throne may be defunct, but the royal family’s fortune is still put at €65m ($73m), as of 2017, including four castles and 20,000 hectares of forest. In 2015 Michael denied Nicholas Medforth-Mills, the son of his second daughter, his title and dynastic rights for allegedly fathering a child out of wedlock (he denies this). And the self-styled “Prince Paul of Romania” has repeatedly tried to take Michael to court over his dynastic rights as grandson of Carol II from a morganatic marriage (ie, to a woman of lower social rank, preventing the passing on of a title). In 2011 tabloids in Romania and Britain shared speculation that Charles, Prince of Wales, could become king, thanks to ancestry shared with Vlad the Impaler (the inspiration for Bram Stoker’s Dracula). Today’s royal claimants, it seems, may not get their teeth into the task of ruling.