THE SUPREME COURT waded into fraught waters this week in considering the case of Vernon Madison, a 68-year-old death-row inmate in Alabama whose vascular dementia has stripped him of any memory of his crime. No one disputes that Mr Madison killed a police officer in 1985 or that strokes he suffered in 2015 and 2016 have taken a grave toll on his mind. But while Alabama insists its prisoner is competent to be executed, Mr Madison’s lawyers argue otherwise. In 1976, four years after declaring America’s system of capital punishment unconstitutional, the Supreme Court gave the death penalty new life, saying it could be constitutional. But decisions in the wake of Gregg v Georgia have barred the execution of people who are insane (1986), intellectually disabled (2002), under 18 when committing their crimes (2005) and psychotically deluded (2007). Putting people to death under these circumstances violates basic human decency, the justices have ruled, violating the Eighth Amendment's ban on “cruel and unusual punishments”. In Ford v Wainwright, the 1986 case, the court cited the “natural abhorrence civilised societies feel at killing one who has no capacity to come to grips with his own conscience or deity”. But neither Ford nor the subsequent cases quite came to grips with what it means for a person to “come to grips” with his execution. According to the 2007 decision, Panetti v Quarterman, the death penalty should not be imposed on those who lack a "rational understanding” of why the state intends to execute them. But as Justice Anthony Kennedy, author of that ruling, acknowledged, “a concept like rational understanding is difficult to define”. It’s clear that a murderer with a “misanthropic personality” or an “amoral character” has no cause to claim an exemption from execution, while someone with a “psychotic disorder” does. But merely being “aware” of the state’s rationale for an execution is not equivalent, Justice Kennedy wrote, to “a rational understanding of it”. Mr Madison’s plea fits somewhere in this murky conceptual framework, but on October 2nd, the justices had some trouble discerning precisely where. (They bandied about the term "rational" 38 times.) The 33-year veteran of death row—in solitary confinement for all that time—cannot “fully orient to time and place”, his lawyer, Bryan Stevenson, told the justices. His acute vascular dementia brought on by strokes “has left his cognitive abilities greatly diminished” with “intellectual functioning in the borderline range” and a sharply compromised memory. He is legally blind, slurs his speech, walks only with assistance and cannot recite the alphabet past the letter G. He is, Mr Stevenson said, “bewildered and confused most of the time”. All this is unfortunate, Justice Samuel Alito told Mr Stevenson. But Mr Madison’s “serious physical problems and mental problems” may not excuse him from the death penalty. After all, he pointed out, a lower-court judge found Mr Madison had not shown that he lacks a rational understanding of the “punishment he is about to suffer and why he is about to suffer it”. The lawyer for Alabama, Thomas Govan, built on Justice Alito’s note. “There is no confusion from Mr Madison's perspective”, he said. The inmate’s own expert said "he understands the sentence, specifically the meaning of a death sentence" and that “the reason he was in prison was because of murder". Here Justice Sonia Sotomayor objected: What, she asked, if “he can't understand or really follow through in his thinking what that means”? It seems he is “just not rational in the way you and I understand it”. After all, he knows he has a toilet inches from his bed but regularly soils himself and asks guards to take him to relieve himself. Mr Govan pushed back: “[O]n the things that matter, he does understand”. Alabama "still [has] a strong interest in seeking retribution for a horrible crime". In an apparent attempt to narrow the disagreement, Chief Justice John Roberts was keen to emphasise the claims each side conceded to the other. Mr Stevenson agreed that merely having no recollection of a crime is not enough to qualify for exemption from execution. If that lacuna is due to blacking out from drinking alcohol, for example, or being in a “fugue state” (in Justice Elena Kagan’s words) it cannot serve as a basis for escaping death row. On the other side, Mr Govan agreed that dementia may save a prisoner from execution if it is so severe that it renders him incompetent under the Supreme Court’s previous rulings in Ford and Panetti. So the argument, Chief Justice Roberts said, boils down to “whether Mr Madison himself meets the Ford and Panetti standard”. Justice Stephen Breyer laid out the question in a broader context: “We've all seen people in final stages of Alzheimer's. All right? Think of such a person. Now is there any reason to execute that person when you wouldn't execute the people in Ford and Panetti?” With a reference to prisoners who have spent “20, 30, 40 years” on death row, Justice Breyer noted the “many, many, many” individuals with execution dates who living into old age. This will “become a more common problem”, he said. What “words would you use”, he asked Mr Stevenson, in an opinion establishing a new constitutional rule against putting people with dementia to death? Well, “cerebrovascular” damage can occur at any age, Mr Stevenson replied. So it is more about a particular medical condition than about aged inmates. This was a smart tactical move for Mr Madison’s lawyer. Justice Breyer may want a sweeping new ruling about elderly death-row inmates earning a commutation when they start to decline, but the swing vote in Madison v Alabama is clearly the chief. He is no abolitionist. Chief Justice Roberts joined Justice Clarence Thomas’s dissent in Panetti, where he rejected the “rational understanding” principle as “half-baked”. If Mr Madison is to win a necessary fifth vote, it will likely come from the chief’s assessment that his medical condition impairs his understanding enough to render him incompetent according to the court’s current understanding of the Eighth Amendment. In a recent discussion at Columbia Law School, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said death-penalty cases give her the “most anxiety” of any issues that come before her. Madison v Alabama is a good example of how grisly and conceptually slippery the analysis can be. In his rebuttal, Mr Stevenson noted that the “awesome” power of executing someone must be exercised “fairly, reliably and humanely”. The Eighth Amendment’s constraints on punishing “really fragile, really vulnerable people” aren’t just a window into political justice. They are “a mirror”, he told the justices, on ourselves.