A SMALL room in the Neuer Berliner Kunstverein is covered with drawings, lithographs and collages. There is a fan, tightly wound with string; a long, vertical strip of paper with coloured, zigzagging triangles along it; a monochrome fold-out book with enigmatic subtitles. The exhibition was conceived as a showcase of Geta Brătescu’s ambitious and experimental work; she was billed as “one of the most important conceptual artists in Eastern Europe and beyond”, who, at the age of 92, was still working in her studio every day. But on September 19th, just as the final frames had been hung, Brătescu died. The eponymous exhibition is now something of a memorial, a first draft of her creative history. She was an artist out of sheer force of will. Born in 1926 in a town just north of Bucharest, she spent much of her adult life under socialist rule. When the communists came to power in 1949, she was expelled from the Academy of Fine Arts because of her bourgeois origins (her parents owned property). In 1951 she married Mihai Brătescu, and throughout the 1950s and 1960s she worked as a children’s book illustrator and draughtswoman. It was not until 1969, in the early liberal days of Nicolae Ceauşescu’s rule, that she returned to the university to gain the diploma necessary to become a professional artist. Art in communist Romania was expected to be political, espousing the party line. Socialist realism was the dominant style, portraying subjects such as hydroelectric plants and party leaders in a straightforward and uplifting way. Brătescu, meanwhile, did not let these repressive and adverse circumstances define her avant-garde work. When she produced figurative pieces, she focused mostly on mythical subjects such as Medea or Aesop’s fables. She worked across media—in film, photography, fabric and more—but her preferred method was drawing. She used big chunky pens and pencils, sometimes adding watercolour, but almost always worked in series, drawing the same subject again and again. To Brătescu, a line was like a dance on the page. The current show at the Neuer Berliner Kunstverein is the first solo exhibition of her work in a Berlin institution. It starts with the motif of a bird, which recurred throughout Brătescu’s career. To create her series “Woman and Bird” (2007), Brătescu kept her eyes closed while working. The result is an array of five scratchy line drawings of feminine and winged figures: in one, the bird floats alone; in another, it appears to kiss a woman’s face with its beak. In “The History of the Unknown Bird” (2011), which Brătescu also drew with closed eyes, a salmon-pink figure seems to spread its wings over an inky blue horizon. “This bird is a metaphor for the thought that takes flight”, Magda Radu, the show’s curator, explains, noting the artist’s interest in involuntary movement as a haphazard path to creativity. Collage was also a method for Brătescu to piece related thoughts into a whole—she called it “drawing with scissors”—and she made ample use of found material. Many of her recent drawings are on lined, exercise book-type scraps. In one series, “The Traveller” (2006), a simplified human figure, slightly different every time, slouches across 34 brown envelopes addressed to Brătescu’s husband from National Geographic. “She had to work with what was available,” Ms Radu says; the dimensions of a random page were allowed to dictate a work’s shape and size. The artist had a remarkable facility to turn the mundane into carefully balanced compositions. The most recent work in the exhibition is a video made with Ștefan Sava, “The Gesture, The Drawing” (2018), shown publicly for the first time. It offers a unique insight into Brătescu’s personality. Stacks of papers, fat pens and endless books surround the artist, a pale figure with large glasses who sits, unassuming, in the centre. She talks in Romanian, patiently facing the camera, about the value of “a day spent with pencil on paper”. The camera hovers over her shoulder as she moves her black felt-tip pen around the page, curving here, slicing it against a ruler there. She chatters excitedly as she follows her intuition across the paper: “Like that!” she exclaims. “Yes, yes!” It is uncanny to watch and think how recently this animated, dynamic artist was labouring in her studio. “I never regarded her as a purely historical artist, but as someone who is still with us and working,” Ms Radu says. “Now we have to think of her posterity.” She will be remembered for the work to which she was so dedicated, art which was deeply imaginative, relentlessly experimental and playful. “Some people sing to themselves all the time,” Brătescu once said. “I sing with my pens.”