THE MORNING before signing the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) in 1987, Ronald Reagan, then president of America, gifted his Soviet counterpart, Mikhail Gorbachev, a pair of cufflinks. They showed the forging of ploughshares from swords, signifying the goodwill that accompanied the landmark treaty. But President Donald Trump has decided that he wants the swords back. On October 20th he announced that he would pull America out of the treaty and build up missiles until Russia and China “came to their senses”. Some see a wise decision to junk a cold war relic; others a looming arms race. What is this treaty? The INF treaty has its origins in the Euromissile crisis of the late 1970s and early 1980s. The Soviet Union’s deployment of the SS-20, an advanced and accurate missile that could strike most of Europe from deep within Russia alarmed Europe. America had short-range missiles in Europe, which could not reach Soviet territory, and long-range ones at home and aboard submarines, but nothing in this middle category; if the Soviets attacked Europe with the SS-20, America would be forced to escalate to its biggest weapons. European allies fretted that it would not do so. To assuage these concerns, and to force the Soviet Union to change course, America deployed the Pershing II ballistic missile and a new ground-launched cruise missile into Europe. That, in turn, worried the Soviet Union. These could reach Moscow in under ten minutes, potentially forcing leaders into a panicky response. Anti-nuclear protests erupted across Europe as the new missiles rolled in. The INF treaty cut through this knot. It prohibited not only the offending Soviet and American missiles but also the flight-testing, development and deployment of all ground-based missiles with ranges between 300 and 3,300 miles. Almost 3,000 existing weapons were destroyed, with the Soviet Union getting rid of twice as many. Why did the agreement snap? One reason was Russian cheating. America, followed by its NATO allies, accused Russia of flight-testing, and then deploying, an INF-range cruise missile called the 9M729. Another was China. In the 2000s, Vladimir Putin toyed with the idea of leaving the deal as other states, including a rising China, whose relationship with Russia remained testy, were racking up non-nuclear intermediate-range missiles. As ties between Russia and China warmed, these concerns faded. It became America’s turn to worry that China was accumulating missiles beyond the treaty’s grasp, while America had to put its own aboard expensive and scarce ships, submarines and aircraft. That seems to have convinced Mr Trump to walk away. Should America follow through on its promise to leave the treaty, it would have several consequences. First, Russia might quickly build up intermediate-range missiles aimed at Europe. These could include not only the 9M729, but also the RS-26 “Rubezh”, an intercontinental ballistic missile that has been tested at ranges skirting the upper limit of the INF. Second, America would speed up its pursuit of a matching capability. Officials admit that research is in the “early stages”; a working missile is years away. Third, deploying such missiles will require virtuoso diplomacy. European leaders would shy away from accepting them, perhaps more so after Mr Putin's threat on October 24th that hosts "would expose their territory to the threat of a possible retaliatory strike. If America were to cut a deal with one or two more enthusiastic allies, like Poland, over NATO’s head, it would shake the alliance. It is less clear how Asian allies would respond. Japan has come out against America’s withdrawal from the treaty and South Korea, which is trying to improve ties with China, may not want to host them either. America is free to put missiles on Guam, although sceptics argue that ground-based missiles crammed onto a small island would be vulnerable in a war. Three decades later, the knot has retied itself.