WITH Brett Kavanaugh’s fraught confirmation battle still raging across the street at the Capitol, the Supreme Court got back to work on October 1st on a quieter note. In the justices’ hands was a three-inch amphibian known as the dusky gopher frog. One of the most endangered species in the world, the dusky gopher numbered 135 in 2015—all of them living near a pond in Mississippi. Weyerhaeuser Co. v United States Fish and Wildlife Service asks whether the federal government erred in 2012 when it designated 1,544 acres in Louisiana as additional “critical habitat” essential to the species’ survival. The area in question belongs to Weyerhaeuser and a few other lumber companies, all unhappy that the Fish and Wildlife Service’s move has, in the words of Timothy Bishop, the company’s lawyer, diminished the value of their land by “tens of millions of dollars”. Mr Bishop told the justices that since no dusky gopher frogs currently reside on his client’s land, and wouldn’t survive there without a transformation of its terrain, the Endangered Species Act (ESA) does not authorise the government to set it aside as “critical habitat”. The land isn’t even the animal’s habitat, he reasoned, so it makes no sense to deem it critical to their conservation. “We would have to totally change the way that this land operates”, Mr Bishop said, “in order to accommodate the frog”. The loggers’ land caught the eye of the agency because it is home to a rare and peculiar geographical feature crucial to the frogs’ reproduction: “ephemeral ponds” that fill up annually and dry out by summer. The larvae and tadpoles develop in these small bodies of water and make it through because there are no fish to gobble them up. But with decreased rainfall and environmental change, ephemeral ponds are in short supply. “The dusky gopher frog is a critically endangered species”, Edwin Kneedler, the deputy solicitor general, told the justices. “It is at serious risk of extinction. As the Fish and Wildlife Service found, if the frog is to be conserved and the risk of its extinction reduced”, the acres in Louisiana with their unique ponds are “essential” to fulfil the express purposes of the ESA. The colloquy between the justices and the lawyers focused on how significant a change to existing lands the law could reasonably expect. In an extended exchange with Justice Elena Kagan, Mr Bishop granted that if all that was needed was “a very minimal change” like “digging a few holes”, the ESA may permit the government to designate unoccupied tracts as critical habitat. But the dusky gopher frog’s idiosyncrasies also require nearby uplands with open-canopy forests and a particular type of ground cover serving as herbaceous highways between the trees and the ponds. The 1,544 acres would have to be “totally remade”, Mr Bishop argued, to be hospitable to the dusky gopher. After Justice Samuel Alito interceded, questioning the presumption that the frogs will necessarily be wiped out without the land set-aside, Mr Bishop mentioned that there are “other options”. The government, he said, could “buy land that is not yet but may in the future become habitat”. Chief Justice Roberts posed the dilemma to Mr Kneedler. If there were ephemeral ponds in Alaska, he mused, “you could build a giant greenhouse and plant the long-leaf pines” there, giving the frog a servicable home albeit at great cost and trouble. Could the government designate such odd spots as critical habitat? No, Mr Kneedler responded, since the law only requires “reasonable efforts” to change the landscape and make it habitable for an endangered species. Planting trees or draining a swamp are reasonable, he said; erecting palatial greenhouses is not. But the chief pressed on: “What’s the limit?” And Justice Alito chimed in: “What’s the definition of reasonable?” Justice Stephen Breyer wasn’t bothered by the vagaries of this open-ended concept. “The statute books are filled with words like reasonable”, he said. Weyerhaeuser is a “typical agency case” involving a congressional grant of discretion to an administrative secretary. The Fish and Wildlife Service has the authority to make the call as long as its conclusion isn’t outlandish. “It’s not reasonable to say that this area is essential”, he said, “if the frogs will die anyway”. But if changes can be made to the land that are likely to save the frog without abusing that discretion, the court should not stand in the agency’s way. It seems the four left-leaning justices are inclined to let the government go ahead with its efforts to protect the dusky gopher, while the four right-of-center justices are not. A split decision lets stand the ruling in the court below, and the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals sided with the government by a vote of 2-1. So if Weyerhaeuser comes down to a 4-4 divide, the croakers, not the loggers, will reap the benefits.