THE GETHSEMANE Lutheran Church, a plain six-storey building in downtown Seattle whose dark red exterior is adorned by a simple cross, offers something more than worship and community gatherings. It also houses one of more than 1,100 religious communities across the United States which are actively committed to succouring vulnerable immigrants who fear deportation. For a place of worship to join the Sanctuary movement (whose supporters are mostly Christian churches but also include some synagogues and mosques) can mean helping with legal advice or simply providing a space to drop by. In a few cases, churches provide longer-term physical security for people who might otherwise be arrested and expelled. Gethsemane, for example, has served as a home for the past few months to José Robles, a 43-year-old man from Mexico who trekked across the desert into the United States 18 years ago. Facing a deportation order, he took refuge in the premises with the hope of biding the time needed to secure a U-Visa, a status he claims on the basis of having been the victim of a violent robbery. Places of worship are regarded by the American Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency (ICE) as so-called sensitive locations, where they would avoid making arrests. In the United States, the Sanctuary campaign gathered pace in the 1980s, when civilians fled north from civil wars in Central America. In some cases, after they were sent back home they were murdered by right-wing death squads. Donald Trump’s presidency and the anti-migrant rhetoric that brought him to power have triggered a revival. Within weeks of the November 2016 election, the number of spiritual communities offering sanctuary jumped from 400 to 800. This reflects a wider trend across the historically Christian world. On one hand, political parties which beat the drum of Christian nativism are making capital out of antipathy to newcomers. On the other, churches and other spiritual communities are looking for ways to give practical expression to the teachings of their creeds. For most, this includes succour to the vulnerable. Thus Durham Cathedral, one of the grandest places of worship in England, will this week host an event celebrating the role of the church as a place of refuge to newcomers (including help to recent arrivals from Syria) over ten centuries. According to Katharyne Mitchell, a professor of sociology at the University of California in Santa Cruz, who has studied the phenomenon, the impulse to help runs very deep: “When governmental authority is not doing the right thing, their faith sort of commands them to look to a higher law…” Besides America, Germany is the other Western country where sanctuary in churches is a well-developed phenomenon. More than 800 people are currently avoiding deportation by camping out in Protestant or Catholic places of worship (or clerical homes) across that country. In America, migrants sheltering in churches (officially there are estimated to be just 30 or 40, though there may be many more undocumented cases) are generally people who have lived in the country a long time but suddenly fall foul of the immigration authorities. In Germany, the typical shelter-seeker has arrived recently, via a neighbouring country, and is at risk of being sent back first to that country, and ultimately all the way home. In 2015, the Federal Office for Refugees and Migrants in Berlin struck a deal with the German churches that laid out a formal procedure for dealing with such cases. The hosting churches prepare a dossier explaining why these individuals did not merit being sent back across the border they had crossed. The authorities would then make a “solution-oriented” study, with an eye to achieving some sort of consensus about the affected migrant’s status. The system worked quite well for a while but it is now under pressure. Ironically perhaps, politicians on the Christian right and centre-right have been among its most vocal critics. In Bavaria, which has been politically dominated by the conservative Christian Social Union, Doris Otminghaus, a determined Protestant cleric who has been awarded several human-rights prizes for her efforts to shelter migrants, has also faced police investigation. In the town of Kreuznach in central Germany, prosecutors have begun the process of lodging criminal charges against five Protestant clergy for sheltering illegal residents, namely a group of nine Sudanese who were in imminent danger of being deported to Italy and thence to their homeland. The clerics insisted that the migrants had a well-founded fear of persecution and that their cases had not been well examined. It seems unlikely that the clergy will face any worse than a fine, which their church will pay. But the case reflects a general breakdown of a hitherto functioning system. Liberal-minded clergy are indignant over a recent change in the rules that raises from six to 18 months the period a migrant must stay in Germany to avoid being sent back across the border. Despite the rising tensions over migration in almost every historically Christian country, there have only been a handful of cases where police have violated the sanctuary extended a church. This is in keeping with a custom which goes back to medieval Europe. One exception occurred in Iceland in 2016, when police entered a Lutheran church in Reykjavik and dragged away two young Iranians, in defiance of the pastor and her congregation, who had formed a circle round the altar. The men were duly deported to Norway. Given the political trends across the Western world, the chances are that tensions between Christian hospitality and defensive Christian nativism will rise. Pastor Joanne Engquist of the Gethsemane church in Seattle says she is prepared for whatever storms may lie ahead. “We are not trying to hide something, in fact we are trying to highlight something…and say, ‘this system is broken and needs to change’.”