ROALD DAHL had long delighted children with his tales of giant peaches, chocolate factories, marvellous medicines and champions of the world. He had beguiled young readers with witches, twits, cunning foxes, thieving fathers and quick-thinking boys. His 14th novel, published 30 years ago on October 1st 1988, offered something slightly different. Its title promised no histrionics, only the story of “Matilda” (she, along with Sophie in “The BFG”, was a rare female protagonist). It promised less fantasy, too: swashbuckling adventures in parallel universes with mythical creatures or talking animals were replaced with dark domestic concerns. Yet Dahl’s book about a young neglected bookworm became his best-loved. In the 30 years since its publication, the novel has sold 17m copies worldwide and been adapted into a film and a blockbuster musical. The story begins by undermining the idea that all parents must love and cherish their children. Matilda, a brilliant mathematician and prodigious reader, is loathed by her benighted parents. Her father, who flogs knackered cars, despises his solitary, inscrutable, intellectual child and insists that she join the family around the “dreaded box” (after all, he reasons, “there’s nothin’ you can get from a book that you can’t get from a television fastah!”). When Miss Honey, Matilda’s teacher, arrives to tell her parents about her brilliance, Mrs Wormwood says she is “not in favour of blue-stocking girls…Looks is more important than books, Miss Hunky.” Yet school, which should have been a refuge, is also treacherous terrain for Matilda. Miss Trunchbull, the headmistress, is formidable, a “fierce tyrannical monster who frightened the life out of pupils and teachers alike”. She is contemptuous of her charges, referring to one as an “ignorant little slug”, a “witless weed” and “empty-headed hamster”. She is mercurial, and her punishments severe. One child is flung across the playground by her pigtails; several are locked for hours in the “Chokey”, a cupboard filled with broken glass and rusty nails. The poor, ever-hungry Bruce Bogtrotter is proclaimed a “denizen of the underworld” for stealing from the Trunchbull, and forced to eat an entire 18-inch chocolate cake. There are some allies along the way—Lavender, Mrs Phelps the librarian and Miss Honey—but for the most part Matilda faces down her foes on her own. Dahl’s adults are ignorant, lazy autocrats (several of his novels share this preoccupation, grimly inspired by his own experience at boarding school.) They try to change Matilda through mockery, bullying and intimidation. “Squashing a bad girl is like trying to squash a bluebottle,” Miss Trunchbull says. “You bang down on it and the darn thing isn’t there.” Her refusal to be squashed is what makes the novel so thrillingly enjoyable. She dishes out pranks and punishments of her own to the “beastly” grown-ups, involving a parrot, super glue or chalk. She is pithy and chatty and beguilingly quiet by turns. When a water jug containing a freshly caught newt is spilt, seemingly at random, Matilda is accused but displays an artful charm. “I have not moved away from my desk, Miss Trunchbull, since the lesson began,” she maintains. “I can say no more.” Matilda’s ability to escape into other worlds is also a key aspect of the novel, which is at its heart an ode to literature. Through books, Matilda can flee oafish relatives and weapon-wielding teachers. She can meet “amazing people who lived exciting lives”: she “went on olden-day sailing ships with Joseph Conrad. She went to Africa with Ernest Hemingway and to India with Rudyard Kipling. She travelled all over the world while sitting in her little room in an English village.” (New editions of the novel, released to coincide with the 30th anniversary, depict Matilda as a librarian, an astrophysicist and—most fittingly—a globe-trotting traveller atop a mountain.) Dahl weaves in references to his writerly forebears such as Dickens, who conjures “magic with his words” in “Great Expectations”, and the Brontë sisters’ headstrong female characters. Once you have turned the page on this story, it said to its young readers, further adventures await. “Matilda” has enjoyed extraordinary longevity because its lessons must be learnt by every generation (not least the spelling song). Dahl shows that difference need not mean loneliness, that pluck and intelligence are to be treasured and that adults are not always the role models children expect them to be. The fearless, resourceful and kind protagonist has power and uses it for good; she chooses curiosity and independence over ignorance and cruelty. Matilda—whose name means “strength in battle”—proves that when someone says “I'm right and you’re wrong, I'm big and you're small” there is still something you can do about it.