ROUGHLY 800 “boat people” live on the tiny Pacific island of Nauru under “Operation Sovereign Borders”, Australia’s policy of exiling to offshore-processing centres those asylum-seekers who try to reach the country by boat. In its 11 months on the island, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), a charity, counted 78 refugees or asylum-seekers who had attempted suicide or self-harm, or thought about it. But earlier this month Nauru’s government banned MSF from providing mental-health services on the island, claiming it could do the job itself (and later accusing the charity of harbouring a “political agenda against the offshore-processing policy”). Banished psychiatrists fear the decision will cost lives. They are particularly worried about traumatic withdrawal syndrome, which has appeared among child detainees. What is it? Little is known about the psychological condition. It affects mostly children, who first exhibit symptoms of depression and then withdraw from others. Eventually they stop walking, eating and talking, and grow incontinent. In the worst cases, they slip into a state of seeming unconsciousness and fail to respond to pain or other stimuli. In Sweden hundreds of migrant children, facing the possibility of deportation, have been diagnosed since the 1990s with what is known locally as resignation syndrome. Some remain inert for years. Practically no cases have been documented anywhere else. It is unclear, for example, why there have been no signs of the syndrome among migrants at Australia’s other foreign detention centres. Cases which resembled resignation syndrome were recorded in Nazi concentration camps, but they were never formally identified as such. Doctors view the syndrome as a reaction to stress and hopelessness. This goes some way towards explaining its appearance on Nauru, where some “boat people” have been confined for five years as part of a process of indefinite detention that the UN has ruled illegal. Australia refuses to accept even those whose refugee claims have been approved, and seeks instead to place them in other countries. MSF refuses to say how many of the children on Nauru may be suffering from traumatic withdrawal syndrome. A report published in August suggested there were at least 30. The National Justice Project, a legal centre, has brought 35 children from Nauru this year. It estimates that seven were suffering from “traumatic refusal”, another term for resignation syndrome. Three, it says, were psychotic. Sweden’s experience raises concerns about contagion. Researchers there hypothesise that the ailment is fanned by cultural conditions: children may learn that dissociation is a way to deal with trauma. Nauru’s hospital is ill-equipped to deal with the litany of mental-health problems already affecting asylum-seekers. It has only one psychiatrist, who does not speak English, and no beds are available for suicidal patients. Beth O’Connor, an MSF doctor booted off the island, sees “no therapeutic solution” for those held there indefinitely. This month a handful of conservative Australian politicians broke ranks, calling for all children to be removed from Nauru (and indeed all those referred for clinical treatment have now been taken away). The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is considering transferring some refugees to New Zealand, if New Zealand guarantees that they will not be allowed to travel on to Australia. The Labor opposition wants to make it easier to transfer patients to Australia for medical treatment. Yet there will be no end to the policy that is causing the crisis. Both major parties support “Operation Sovereign Borders”, claiming it stops more asylum-seekers dying at sea.