“I’M GOING, ‘Ha ha, yeah, yeah,’ and inside I’m going ‘I want to fucking die,” writer and actor Stephen Fry once said. Pete Davidson, an American performer, has spoken of his need to do comedy every day: “or else I will lose my mind.” “All the comedians I’ve known have been deeply depressive people,” Kenneth Williams, an actor, asserted. “They kept it at bay with this facade.” Funny men and women have long been painted as mad geniuses; studies have been conducted into their unusual personalities. Many use laughter to overcome or acknowledge their suffering, transmogrifying personal darkness into light. Yet documentaries and biopics of comedians have struggled to get the balance right between private pain and the joy these individuals bring to the public. “Love, Gilda” (pictured, top), a new documentary about Gilda Radner, is the latest to fall short of capturing the complexity of one of comedy’s most important and tragic figures. It uses interviews with colleagues and relatives, archive videos and excerpts from her writings to tell the story of her rise to fame: her early theatre work, her time with the Second City comedy group in Chicago, her role in the “National Lampoon Radio Hour” in 1974 and her casting in the inaugural season of “Saturday Night Live”. Working with celebrated performers such as Bill Murray and John Belushi, Radner’s electrifying talent made her the breakout star of the show’s earliest years. The documentary makes this, and Radner’s joy at the adulation, clear. It relies heavily on footage of her performing and facing cheering crowds. But comedy could also mask darker truths for Radner, truths at which “Love, Gilda” only hints. The documentary suggests that she was insecure and had an overwhelming need to be loved, which drove her to the stage and into short-lived relationships. It does not probe her frequent jokes about excessive eating, which she made even as she wasted away from bulimia, nor does it do justice to her own writings on depression, confusion and discontent. Radner’s stark considerations of her mental health are on screen only for a moment before the film cuts to another clip of her performances, creating a disconcerting contrast that is never fully explored. The film moves quickly through her final years and death in 1989 from ovarian cancer, as if the creators did not want to dwell on the idea of someone so funny leaving behind a legacy shaped in part by a premature demise. “Come Inside My Mind”, a recent HBO documentary about Robin Williams, who committed suicide in 2014, follows a similar format. Celebrities and friends attest to his influence, while archival footage shows the evolution of his personal brand of manic comedy alongside his acclaimed dramatic performances. But, despite its title, “Come Inside My Mind” does not provide especial insight into Williams’s life. It provides only a surface acknowledgement of his struggles: the lonely childhood that drove him to perform for attention, his drug and alcohol addictions and health problems, including the Lewy body dementia with which he was diagnosed before his death. In a voiceover, Williams says that “every person is driven by some deep, deep, deep, deep secret.” While “Come Inside My Mind” strives to find what propelled Williams to comedy and fame, it never quite brings it into focus. Biopics, too, can leave something to be desired in their handling of difficult themes. “A Futile and Stupid Gesture” (pictured, above), released on Netflix in January, focuses on the life of Doug Kenney, co-founder of National Lampoon. It emulates the publication’s irreverent style of comedy to great effect: the magazine was known for work that bordered on insensitivity—particularly when addressing issues like the Vietnam war—and bad taste (an early issue featured a picture of a dog with a gun to its head, threatening the reader that the dog would be killed if the issue weren’t purchased). That makes for a jolly film, but not an enlightening one. When it comes close to confronting the sad elements in Kenney’s life, it veers jarringly away from them. During a scene in which Kenney overhears his father lamenting his son’s path in life, his friend Chevy Chase (Joel McHale) gets up to pour himself a drink and immediately collapses on the sideboard, breaking everything in true slapstick fashion. Even Kenney’s funeral, after what his friends have speculated was suicide, is an occasion for a food fight. Drug abuse, infidelity, isolation—all are kept at arm’s length by sight gags and breaks in the fourth wall, a decision that is at once true to the nothing-is-sacred spirit of National Lampoon and ungratifying for those seeking to understand one of the men behind it. The best films about comedians are challenging, raising the curtain on their performances. “Lenny” (1974), which starred Dustin Hoffman as Lenny Bruce, focused on his outspoken brand of humour as much as his self-absorption and the drug use which would eventually kill him. “Man on the Moon” (1999) cast a critical eye on Andy Kaufman, a notoriously difficult comedian and performance artist who refused to break character even off-stage. Films about comedians are not only an opportunity to explore the personal cost of making others laugh, but to depict the full range of human emotions: to both celebrate performers’ talent and acknowledge that they spent time in the darker corners of the psyche. Laying bare that juxtaposition, rather than obscuring it, will allow for a richer appreciation of their achievements.