WAVERING voters in highly competitive congressional districts are not going to base their electoral decision on whether and when America’s ambassador to the United Nations resigns. That Nikki Haley chose to do so on October 9th is nonetheless odd. Just a few weeks before the mid-terms, when Republicans are still crowing about having rammed Brett Kavanaugh onto the Supreme Court, her resignation reinforces the impression that Mr Trump’s administration is understaffed and chaotic. But anyone to whom that matters is already voting for a Democrat, Mr Trump’s supporters have little use for the UN and would probably be happy to see Mr Haley’s position unfilled. Her departure does not move the needle all that much: Democrats remain on track to take the House of Representatives, and Republicans to hold the Senate. Her resignation seems to have caught senior White House staff by surprise. Despite a recent report raising questions about her use of private jets, Ms Haley faced no pressure to resign. Unlike many of the president’s initial cabinet appointees, she began as a critic rather than a supporter of Mr Trump. But, like so many other Republicans, she turned from critic to good soldier, promoting Mr Trump’s policies and adopting his combative style—warning before member states voted on a resolution condemning Mr Trump’s decision to move the American embassy to Jerusalem that she would be “taking names”. Ms Haley was never a whole-hearted Trumpist. She said that the women who accused her boss of sexual misconduct “should be heard.” She tangled with other members of his cabinet, and did not get along with Rex Tillerson, Mr Trump’s first secretary of state. Like Bobby Jindal, another child of Indian immigrants who became Republican governor of a southern state, Ms Haley seemed to offer a more cosmopolitan, inclusive and open future for the Republican future, a prospect that died when Mr Trump reoriented the party around nativist grievances. She managed an unusual balancing act during her nearly two years in office: remaining in the good graces of both Mr Trump (who had flagged up a “big announcement with my friend” in a morning tweet) and his Republican-establishment opponents. Part of that was due to her portfolio: neither Mr Trump nor his supporters have ever seemed terribly engaged by foreign policy, while the positions Ms Haley advocated at the UN—tough on Iran, defensive of Israel, pragmatically nurturing alliances (rather than the pointlessly confronting them like Mr Trump)—were mainstream pre-Trump Republican ones. There has been speculation that Ms Haley resigned to preserve her future political viability. Things could get a lot rockier for the Trump administration should Democrats win the House in November. Getting out now lets her claim good service in the Trump administration, which should count for something in the future with his supporters, while also keeping herself unsullied by whatever Democrats may use their subpoena power to unearth. Bill Kristol, a prominent Republican never-Trumper, floated Ms Haley as a possible primary challenger to the president in 2020. But during the Oval Office appearance with Mr Trump at which she announced her resignation, Ms Haley told reporters that she would campaign for the president, rather than challenge him, in his next race. Should he not serve out his full term, or decide not to run in 2020, she is a natural running mate for Mike Pence, and an ideal figure to help Republicans rebuild their brand with educated women. And if Lindsey Graham, the senior senator from her home state of South Carolina, enters Mr Trump’s administration after the mid-terms, his seat, which is up in 2020, is hers for the taking. Ms Haley would of course face a challenge from the right, but she was elected governor there twice, and remains popular. That would leave her well placed to run in 2024, when she would be just 52 years old.