“DR WHO”, the BBC’s long-running science-fiction series, has returned with a change of cast. The new doctor is for the first time a woman, played by Jodie Whittaker. She is, depending on your interpretation, the 13th or 14th incarnation of the role.* (Spoilers follow) Predictably there was some tutting—by male fans—when the casting was announced. But objections based on realism seem disingenuous when the doctor in question is a time-travelling alien with two hearts whose spaceship is a 1960s police box. Ms Whittaker’s gender, race or religion are irrelevant; what matters is whether she is a convincing incarnation. A Time Lady can be just as convincing as a Time Lord. All doctors should be both eccentric and intelligent; the absent-minded professor is the underlying template. They also need the ability to be, in turns, funny, brave and stern. The two most iconic versions of the character, Tom Baker in the 1970s and David Tennant in this century’s reboot, had all those qualities. The good news is that Ms Whittaker shows every sign of stamping her own mark on the role. She has bags of charisma, and shows all the humour, bravery, intelligence and eccentricity required. She will clearly be at the playful, rather than the crotchety, end of the personality spectrum. That has worked well in the past: see Matt Smith or Patrick Troughton. But the other test for the show is whether it can escape from the convoluted self-referential plotting that marked the reign of the previous showrunner, Steven Moffat. The new boss is Chris Chibnall, best known for the seaside mystery “Broadchurch”, and he begins with a “Predator”-style plot about a trophy-hunting alien. The production values of the first episode are high and the script allows the new doctor to establish her character. Whether the introduction of three new assistants will work is another matter. The purpose of sidekicks is to play both the Dr Watson role, asking the dumb questions that allow the doctors to explain the plot, and, on countless occasions, to act as hostages who need to be rescued. A worrying possibility with the new group is that they appear to have been written to generate morally uplifting stories. One character had suffered from cancer (and lost his wife); one had dyspraxia and struggled to ride a bike; the third was an underappreciated policewoman. The danger is that the doctor turns into a social worker. Still, for those of us who can recall the very first episode in 1963, the latest series can only be a relief. At its best, the programme shows that good can beat evil without resorting to excessive violence—while having a few laughs on the way. And it can create some very scary monsters (such as the Weeping Angels or the Silence, for those familiar with the show). Ms Whittaker has the potential to be one of the best doctors of, er, all time. *In the special, one-off 50th-anniversary show, John Hurt played what might be deemed the 9th incarnation, so the number of incarnations depends on how you count them.