ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) is the most discussed technology of the 21st century, but conceptualisations of it in art, film and literature have not progressed much since the 20th. Traces of Maria, the destructive cyborg vamp in “Metropolis” (1927), can be detected in Ava, the innocent yet sexualised humanoid robot of “Ex Machina” (2015). There is little interest in the question of what new technology will mean for human beings beyond an existential one: “will machines destroy us, and come to rule?” But what might this destruction or control look like? Will AI bring wide-reaching changes to society, or simply exacerbate existing social problems? Rachel Maclean, a multimedia artist, grapples with these difficult questions. Her early work focused on the internet. “Lolcats” (2012), a 13-minute video, features a cast of stylised cats and kittens drawn from the first generation of memes—funny pictures of anthropomorphised felines. The Lolcats vie for authority in the desert, acting out a drama that is part revenge tragedy, part “Mad Max”. The film is hilarious, and asks a question that recurs in Ms Maclean’s work: why does technology seem to expose humanity’s basest instincts in terms of humour, entertainment and power? Ms Maclean uses saturated colours, exaggeration and disturbing images to get her message across. Her work is usually visually overwhelming and fast-moving, and not for the faint of heart. “We Want Data” (2016), a series of prints, depicts human-emoji hybrids either presiding over the denizens of their world or else being eaten by them. “It’s What’s Inside That Counts” (2016), a short film, has the bright and vivid feel of a children’s cartoon that belies its darker message. One female character has a touch screen grafted on to her abdomen, and it is brutally smashed in a simulation of “real” violence. Ms Maclean uses existing templates—advertising, social media, animations—to show how technological development can create or cement social hierarchies. An exhibition at the Zabludovicz Collection in London features new work of a similar bent, but with a keener focus on gender, wealth and AI. “Make Me Up” (pictured), a film, is a baroque and bloody version of “America’s Next Top Model”. A group of women named Siri, Alexa and Cortana compete for an unspecified prize and are surgically altered into sexy performing dolls. They are directed by a “Mistress” via a touch-screen remote; AI controls and coerces the women, transmogrifying them into humanoid sex robots. While technology would seem to offer opportunity—the women find out about free surgeries through Instagram—in fact it relegates them to the status of servants. “Spite Your Face”, another film, picks up themes of wealth, monopolies and abuses of power. A poor young man named Pic has the luck of discovering a disembodied golden nose, which he trades in for one wish from a virtual Aphrodite. He chooses to enrich himself and becomes an internet mogul, zealously enforcing the boundary between the wealthy digital world and the impoverished analogue world. Pic justifies his behaviour by repeating familiar sentiments: that anyone might become wealthy with willing and that mainstream political views are untruths (fake news, in other words). “Spite Your Face”, like “Make Me Up”, suggests that technology provides new opportunities for subjugation and ghettoisation. The question, Ms Maclean makes clear, is not whether machines will destroy societies and communities but how they might go about it. “Make Me Up” offers disturbing variations on familiar technology. Remote controls force the women to dance, speed up, slow down, choke or stop talking. A surveillance AI—in the form of bubblegum-pink eyes on stalks (pictured, top)—assesses the women’s facial expressions. “Cortanna > Sexy > Good Girl” is rewarded, while “Siri > Angry > Naughty Girl” is punished. The boxes used to identify the women resemble the facial-recognition tagging functions on Facebook and Instagram. We have already laid the foundations for these technologies, it seems to say, so how long until this kind of imaginative creation becomes real? As such, Ms Maclean’s warnings are vivid. Her strange dystopian dream-worlds—full of anger, violence, coercion and exclusion—demand that the viewer think more critically about the future of new technologies. At a time when the AI debate focuses upon its implications for global politics, her art imagines the impact on humans’ physical and psychological wellbeing.