WELCOME to Brussels, twinned with Atlanta, Ljubljana and Prague. Like so many other big cities, small towns and even obscure villages, the Belgian capital has acquired a number of symbolic siblings over the past half-century. Yet it isn’t always clear what the purpose of such relationships is. By some counts the first twinning took place in 836, when Le Mans in France handed over the relics of St Liborius to Paderborn in Germany, to shore up the influence of Charlemagne. In its more recent iteration, twinning took off in Europe and the United States after the second world war. But is this linking of towns outdated, something to be wondered at merely by those passing the signs that greet drivers entering a town? In the beginning, town twinning was idealistic and chummy. Often pairings were the result of mayors who were mates, but there was also genuine concern for transnational reconciliation. By connecting citizens through school exchanges, food, sport and travel, the process helped peoples who had opposed one another in conflict get to know each other in peacetime. Coventry in Britain and Stalingrad (now Volgograd) in the former Soviet Union, which were damaged to differing degrees during the war, paired up in 1944. Eventually Coventry was twinned with Dresden, another city that suffered badly. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the urgency to institutionalise bonds between citizens has been lost. War in Europe has seemed distant, and revolutions in communication and mass travel have allowed people to get to know other countries without their mayor acting as middle man. Recent connections, such as the Scottish village of Dull’s with Boring in America and Bland Shire in Australia, seem intended only to generate a chuckle. But in fact 21st-century twinning seems to be evolving into something more practical. Cities and regions seeking solutions to social, economic or environmental problems look for comparable communities with whom to share their technical expertise. The offers by mayors of towns in the Baltics to share their knowledge of how to make Soviet buildings more energy efficient have been snapped up by mayors in Macedonia. Nouvelle-Aquitaine in France and Plateau Central in Burkina Faso made the most of their shared tongue to establish a joint programme for sustainable economic development and to fight climate change. León in Nicaragua and Utrecht in the Netherlands got together to plant 500,000 trees when one lacked space and the other lacked money. Inter-city diplomacy has even developed beyond bilateral partnerships into groups such as the C40, an association of large cities committed to dealing with climate change. Even as these networks and new relationships develop, old-fashioned twinning has not died out. But it is changing from a platform for cultural exchange between citizens of countries separated by war into a way to reconcile citizens whose nations are starting to drift apart. Since the 2016 Brexit vote, interest from British local authorities in setting up partnerships with European towns has apparently increased. Oxford, in Britain, and Wroclaw, in Poland, are one new pairing. They bonded over their dreaming spires and a desire to forge links across Europe while others are breaking down. In this context, the concept of twinning might find a new lease of life, allowing citizens and local representatives to act as de facto diplomats at a time when relationships between national governments are weakening.