DREW GODDARD’S new film, “Bad Times at the El Royale”, has all the ingredients of a 1960s neo-noir film. There’s a priest with a murky past, a crass vacuum-cleaner salesman, a baby-faced bellhop, a singer with an angelic voice, a charismatic cult leader and a southern femme fatale. The Lake Tahoe hotel where this band of misfits meets, and which is the locus of most of the action—the El Royale—has something of a past, too. Straddling the Nevada-California border, it was once the martini-soaked playground of celebrities and politicians. Now it is a half-shuttered, seedy outpost that plays host to a very different class of customer. And like all its new occupants, the El Royale is not what it seems. Mr Goddard, who wrote and directed the film (and also wrote long-running television series such as “Buffy the Vampire Slayer”, “Angel” and “Lost”), enjoys playing with genre conventions. His previous film, “Cabin in the Woods”, gleefully participated in teen-horror tropes while simultaneously dismembering them. Apart from fiddling with clichés, he delights in creating characters and then testing them in fiendish ways (sometimes literally), ratcheting up the tension and the body count. But his latest film takes these themes too far. The film opens with an unexplained murder, presumably from the hotel’s glory days, over a suitcase full of money. Cut to ten years later and new guests are checking in. They are given their room keys and the spiel about the hotel by the bellhop Miles (Lewis Pullman), the only remaining member of staff. A red line bisects the entire structure, marking the division between the two states. On one side, Miles tells them, lies the “warmth and sunshine” of California, on the other the “hope and opportunity” of Nevada. The word “hope” rings somewhat hollow, especially on the Nevadan side, where the gambling licence was suspended the year before and the rooms cost a dollar less than on the Californian side. Before long the promised sunshine disappears too. A storm blows up, rain pours down, and as it does the characters’ identities begin to peel away like strips of damp wallpaper. Is Darlene Sweet (Cynthia Erivo) a prostitute, as salesman Laramie Seymour Sullivan (Jon Hamm) implies? Is he really a salesman? Why is he so insistent on staying all alone in the honeymoon suite? What is Father Daniel Flynn (Jeff Bridges) up to exactly? And just who is the mysterious woman (Dakota Johnson) who drives her car screeching into the lot and writes “Fuck You” in the hotel ledger? Over 140 minutes, plot twists, flashbacks and bodies pile up at an alarming rate. This makes the film unpredictable and genre-bending, but sacrifices character development for spectacle. In some films this works well, since the succession of shocks and splashy gore is the whole point. But here the rush tramples over a dozen wasted opportunities as the audience is sped through to the bloody denouement. This is all the more irritating because of the film’s swashbuckling potential and the strength of the cast. Ms Erivo in particular shines as a down-on-her-luck singer, even though this is her silver-screen debut. What “Bad Times” badly needs is more time. As an eight- or ten-part series, each plot point could have been perfectly executed and each character picked up and carefully tilted to catch the light (before, in most cases, being killed off). As it is, “Bad Times” comes up well short of the sum of its parts.