SYDNEY’S waterfront was long dominated by the Harbour Bridge. Completed in 1932, it is the tallest steel arch bridge in the world, and manages to be imposing, instantly recognisable and elegant all at once. When the search began in 1955 for an architect for an opera house, it was clear that whatever sat upon Bennelong Point would have to visually compete with the beloved “Coathanger”. The modern expressionist design by Jorn Utzon, a Danish architect, fit that blueprint. Inaugurated 45 years ago on October 20th 1973, the Sydney Opera House is one of the 20th century’s most celebrated buildings. Utzon’s design is an exercise in deception. The building seems to shift in shape and shade when viewed from different vantage points in Sydney Harbour. From a distance, its shells appear to sit atop their granite base as one whole structure; upon approach, it is clear that three white points launch from the ground separately, allowing visitors to weave among them. Proximity reveals, too, that the shells are not shaped from smooth panels of cladding, but covered in more than 1m ceramic tiles. Though the building is immense, the shells conceal its true size, for a large part of the complex sits below the plaza. Buildings which play host to the arts are often statements of intent: they are architectural means by which a city can proclaim its civilised seriousness toward music, theatre, dance and ideas. The brutalist National Theatre in London grew out of a post-war mood of optimism; the Lincoln Centre in New York was built as part of Robert Moses’s renewal of the city in the 1950s and 60s. Utzon’s opera house made clear Australia’s intent to be taken seriously as a player on the global arts stage (the Antipodean country had long been tormented by jokes that a yoghurt has more culture). The statement was heard, and the stunning structure was met with immediate international acclaim. This newspaper heralded it “a marvellous and extraordinary building”. Yet in Australia it was the subject of some derision. Political squabbling resulted in Utzon leaving the project in 1966, never to return to see his masterpiece completed. It was delivered ten years behind schedule, a staggering 1,400% over budget (it cost A$102m, $73m, in total). Sydneysiders regarded the building as “a sour joke”, The Economist wrote at the time. “It is almost as if they take a perverse pleasure in the thought that an adornment to their city has a seedy, even ludicrous history.” Naysayers were silenced soon after the Sydney Opera House was officially opened by Queen Elizabeth. Not only had Utzon created a building that crowned the harbour, but he had designed something that changed the way Australia was perceived. Its form became synonymous with culture, Sydney and the country as a whole all at once. Musical legends such as Leonard Bernstein and Luciano Pavarotti came to perform at the venue. Thin Lizzy, a rock band, played a free concert on its steps to 100,000 people in 1978; Crowded House, an Australian band, followed suit and performed their farewell concert there in 1996. It has been the site of an address from Nelson Mandela, a segment in the Olympic opening ceremony in 2000 and various protests and art installations. It is perhaps a sign of how beloved the institution is that it has been the subject of fierce debates in recent weeks. A decision to allow an advertisement for horse racing to be projected onto the building (pictured above) was sternly criticised. Louise Herron, the chief executive of the Sydney Opera House, said that the advert risked its World Heritage status and that Australia “would be seen in the global community as not respecting this jewel, this masterpiece of human creative genius that is the greatest building of the 20th century”. An online petition decrying the decision received more than 300,000 signatures. Scott Morrison, the prime minister, backed the PR stunt, describing the house as “the biggest billboard Sydney has”. Whether the building is truly fit for purpose has also been in question. After Utzon left the project, architects decided to switch the functions of the two main performance halls: the area beneath the largest shell, the intended space for opera and orchestral performances, housed a concert hall instead. Opera performances were moved to the smaller hall, which became known as a subpar venue due to its poor acoustics. To Sydneysiders’ horror, they began losing prestigious performances to a bitter rival, Arts Centre Melbourne, including the much-heralded Opera Australia production of Richard Wagner’s “Ring” cycle in 2013. In order to reassert its prowess, the opera-house complex is undergoing a ten-year, A$273m refurbishment, to be completed in 2021. Mainly funded by the New South Wales government, the plan includes upgrades to the main concert hall, foyer and learning centres, as well as the smaller Joan Sutherland Theatre. Such improvements are long overdue. The Sydney Opera House is a behemoth of 20th-century architecture and Utzon’s crowning achievement. With sensitive improvements it will be able to delight audiences throughout the 21st, too.