“BEAUTIFUL BOY” understands something many films about addiction do not: the way it erases people. For the users, it confiscates every other instinct, thought and desire; loved ones, too, become solely occupied by their recovery. The film, which is based on two memoirs, stars Steve Carell as David, a father grappling with the drug abuse of his son (Timothée Chalamet). It shows the slow destruction that addiction wreaks on their relationship and themselves; both characters are subjugated to drugs in their own way. Nic Sheff (Mr Chalamet) is a bright and boisterous adolescent whose casual experimentation with soft drugs quickly turns to an infatuation with crystal meth and heroin. The viewer never quite knows why. Maybe it is something in his genes? Perhaps his parents’ divorce—his mother lives on another coast, while his father is remarried with two new children—played a role? Probably not, because the film goes to great lengths to show just how well Nic has adjusted to the new family set-up. It is unusual, and refreshing, to see an addiction drama that has such little interest in psychoanalysing its subject. The story then focuses on David’s efforts to save his son’s life, which range from futile attempts at reasoning to suspicion that boils over into rage. In between Nic’s stints in rehab and his long periods of unexplained absence, the film flashes back to the days before his addiction, to remind the viewer of how close their relationship once was and how much has been lost. It is an effective narrative technique, evoking the way addiction disrupts not only a sense of time, but the ability to understand one’s own life. Although Nic is the one using, David’s life is similarly consumed by the addiction; the flashbacks are a means of revealing just how jaded, how weary, he has become. Where he was once a genial presence and a paragon of fatherly love and affection, in the present his face is blank, his eyes constantly searching his son’s face for the truth. Mr Carell offers an original and compelling portrayal of grief and a sense of mourning for someone still alive. But it is Mr Chalamet’s turn that is bound to get the most plaudits. His natural charisma, so evident “Call Me By Your Name” and “Lady Bird”, both hits last year, is clear in scenes when Nic’s drug problem is still under control. His jittery, nervous energy as an addict demands attention, too: his mouth contorts into a twisted shape when he is in need of a fix, his brow furrows painfully when his father confronts him. Some of the film’s dialogue will feel familiar—in one rote scene, David questions if his son is high, to which Nic responds: “You’re suffocating me!” and runs out of the room—but the performances are so raw and so convincing that the film avoids feeling clichéd. With America in the throes of an opioid crisis, “Beautiful Boy” is resonant. But often it is too aware of its apposite timing and its tone strays into instruction. It stops to teach the viewer about the physical effect of crystal meth—Nic’s drug of choice—on the brain. David visits an expert, who gives both him and the audience a lecture. In these scenes you can feel the writers wrestling with the challenges of the “issue movie”, and they end up lecturing on the social issue rather than showing it through emotional or narrative involvement. That would have been a more effective way to tell the story. “Beautiful Boy” wants to help, but sometimes goes about it in the wrong way.