Amid the sooty London fog of the mid 1800s, John Stuart Mill was a rare feminist. His most famous work, “On Liberty”, championed “giving full freedom to human nature”, yet it was his essay, “The Subjection of Women”, ten years later, in 1869, which argued that “the sheer fact of birth” should not dictate the rights of an individual. By then his wife and creative inspiration, Harriet Taylor Mill, had been dead for 11 years, having succumbed to a lung illness. The two had met secretly for years when she was married to another man, though whether the commingling was physical as well as intellectual is only speculation. The question of her impact on Mill’s writings is also unclear. A feminist tract that appeared nearly two decades before “Subjection”, called “The Enfranchisement of Women”, first appeared under Mill’s name but was reprinted later under the name of “Mrs Stuart Mill.” Today there is general consensus that Harriet was the primary author. Her influence has been the subject of intense academic arguments for years. Recent scholarship culminated in a substantively revised entry in the “Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy” in August. The editor, Dale Miller of Old Dominion University in Virginia, analysed Mill’s three most famous works and—with the equanimity of a sage and delicacy of a diplomat—came to a balanced view. Mr Miller concluded that her greatest contribution was probably to turn Mill’s attention to a set of progressive ideals which she was passionate about: socialism, women’s rights, individual liberty and a “utopian” view of humanity’s improvability. However, according to Mill himself, Harriet’s influence was profound. He credits his wife with playing a major role in his most celebrated works. “The Principles of Political Economy” in 1848 was “a joint production with my wife”, he wrote. Later, Mill claimed: “like all that I have written for many years…[“On Liberty”]…belongs as much to her as to me.” And he nodded towards her true authorship of “Enfranchisement,” noting: it was “hers in a particular sense, my share in it being little more than that of an editor and amanuensis”. Richard Reeves, author of “John Stuart Mill: Victorian Firebrand,” a sweeping and sparkling book, describes Mill as having a “lifelong mission to deify Harriet”. Yet Jo Ellen Jacobs, author of “The Voice of Harriet Taylor Mill”, argues that Mill did not give Harriet enough credit. Contemporaries who knew Harriet were often less admiring. Thomas Carlyle, one of the most important social commentators of the 19th century, opined that she “was full of unwise intellect, asking and re-asking stupid questions”. The great philosopher adored and respected his wife. They first met in 1830. Harriet Taylor was married with children, but the two became infatuated and a scandalous affair began. “Yes dear, I will meet you, in the chaise [a horse-drawn carriage], somewhere between this and Southend”, wrote Harriet in an undated note to Mill, “tomorrow will be delightful and I am looking forward to it as the very greatest treat.” The pair eventually married in the spring of 1851, two years after the death of Harriet’s husband. The wedding resulted in Mill’s estrangement from much of his family. And the couple withdrew further from society. Mill’s dedication to his wife in “On Liberty”, published the year after her death, sums up his admiration: “Were I but capable of interpreting to the world one half the great thoughts and noble feelings which are buried in her grave, I should be the medium of a greater benefit to it than is ever likely to arise from anything that I can write, unprompted and unassisted by her all but unrivalled wisdom”. As to whether Harriet can accurately be afforded the title of Mill’s “co-author”, the available evidence is too sparse and contradictory to say. It is true that in “Principles”, one important chapter titled “On the probable futurity of the labouring classes” would not exist without Harriet. And it’s clear she helped edit other chapters. Yet this evidence alone does not warrant the title of co-author. With regards to “On Liberty”, there is evidence to suggest that Mill’s account of the work as “a joint product” is questionable. “The Enfranchisement of Women” is perhaps the best candidate for a work authored primarily or solely by Harriet, explains Mr Miller of Old Dominion. If Mill and Harriet were alive today, they would champion feminist causes such as the #MeToo movement. They spoke out against the abuse of power by men over women as dependents. Between the middle of the 1840s and the early 1850s, the pair co-wrote a number of articles decrying the lax way that the legal system dealt with domestic violence. Though normally gentle souls who abhorred corporal punishment, they recommended exposing and penalising perpetrators by flogging.