IT HAS been a lurching, nauseating ride—and there are still a few twists to come. September 29th marked six months until the scheduled date for Brexit, when Britain’s membership of the EU is set to expire. Theresa May, the prime minister, imposed that deadline by triggering Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union 18 months ago. Since then, Britons have endured a general election, regular rumours of a prime-ministerial coup and endless bickering, both in Britain and in Brussels. According to an analysis published by the Centre for European Reform on September 30th, Britain’s economy is 2.5% smaller than it would have been without a Leave victory. Voters could be forgiven for wanting an end to the awful journey. But nobody is quite sure what the final destination will be. That uncertainty is reflected in betting markets. Betfair’s exchange, which allows punters to gamble against each other, has been taking Brexit-related wagers for more than a year. The wisdom of the crowds can be misguided: Betfair’s customers piled money behind Remain on the day of the referendum, with the probability of victory rising above 85%. But that has not discouraged them from rolling the dice again. Since the vote punters have staked more than £600,000 ($780,000) on Betfair’s various Brexit markets. The odds that they have given for Mrs May to survive until Brexit have fluctuated wildly. In April gamblers rated her chances of clinging on at two in three, after her government announced a transitional agreement with the EU. If Britain can agree a full withdrawal deal, the transitional agreement will give it an extra 21 months of what amounts to continuing membership but without voting rights. By late July, however, Mrs May’s chances of seeing the journey through had fallen to less than 40%, after David Davis and Boris Johnson, two senior Brexiteers, resigned from her cabinet. They did so in protest against the Chequers Agreement, which they felt was too generous to the EU. Despite widespread opposition to her blueprint for the withdrawal deal, Mrs May has hung on. What will the next six months hold? Gamblers reckon there is a 65% chance that Britain’s membership will have been terminated by March 29th—the other options are to apply for an extension or to cancel Brexit altogether. But that termination might come without a withdrawal deal in place. That would plunge Britain over a cliff edge, with no trade or regulatory arrangements with the EU and also no transitional period. Current odds imply a 40% probability that Britain will reach March 29th without a withdrawal treaty, though that scenario could also cover a cancellation of Brexit. For Britons pining for such a reversal, there is still a glimmer of hope. Betfair’s odds suggest that there is nearly a 30% chance of a second referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU by the end of 2019. Delegates at a recent conference for the Labour Party strongly supported that option. There is no guarantee that Remainers would win a re-run of the original vote. But gamblers still entertain the possibility that the Brexit rollercoaster will end up back where it started.