IN “Milkman”, Anna Burns’s Man Booker prize-winning novel, nobody gets called by the name they are born with. The protagonist, “middle sister”, is 18 years old. She lives in a town that is never named—but is probably Belfast—where every day, “rain or shine considering the state of gunplay or bombs, stand-off or riots”, she walks through the streets reading her latest literary find from the 19th century (she does not like 20th century books because she does not like the 20th century). She goes to bars and clubs with “maybe-boyfriend”, goes running by the reservoir and is on call to help her ma with her younger sisters, a “sort of background buffer to help prevent their precocity...spinning way out of control”. One day “milkman”, a paramilitary, interrupts her stroll with Walter Scott’s “Ivanhoe”. He takes a liking to her, and begins to stalk her. Unseen cameras click from behind bushes. She can no longer go running alone. “Intense nosiness about everybody else had always existed” and the community decides that she is “beyond-the-pale”, having a love affair with this 41-year-old terrorist who, despite his sobriquet, “didn’t take milk orders”. Her neighbours ignore the possibility that she is the victim of a predator. Here gossip “washed in, washed out”, but can also can kill. The words flow and flow and flow on the page, and sentences threaten to float away but never do. At a ceremony in London on October 16th, Ms Burns became the first writer from Northern Ireland to win the Man Booker, Britain’s most prestigious literary award, and its £50,000 ($65,700) prize. (American authors claimed it in the previous two years, following a controversial change in the rules that allowed them to be entered alongside British, Irish and Commonwealth writers.) Ms Burns was born in Belfast and her book is set in an environment resembling the Troubles, when sectarian violence flared between Catholic republicans, who wanted the region to become part of a united Ireland, and Protestant loyalists and the British government. But the novel touches on something universal: what violence, unpredictable, persistent and brutal, does to a person’s mind. From the opening line—in which a death is announced and a gun put to middle sister’s breast—Ms Burns plunges the reader straight into her protagonist’s thoughts. A cat’s head is packed neatly into a handkerchief. There are poisonings and there are car-bombs. Women are usually not tolerated if they do not defer to men and “things were not gentle, not ever.” This is a place where life has to be “lived and died in extremes”. Though middle sister is often detached, she is sometimes funny, and wise: “I was too buzzy to read, thinking of teacher, of her manner of saying that there were sunsets everyday, that we weren’t meant to be coffined and buried whilst all the time still living, that nothing of the dark was so enormous that never could we surmount it, that always there were new chapters, that we must let go of the old, open ourselves to symbolism, to the most unexpected of interpretations, that we must too, uncover what we’ve kept hidden, what we think we might have lost.” At one point she says that her “inner world, it seemed had gone away”. Middle sister is numb; yet still, despite the horror, there is tenderness and humour in “Milkman”. Ms Burns has written a consuming tale of everyday life amid terror. It is a deserving winner.