LESS than two months before the 2016 election, Brian Kemp, who as Georgia’s secretary of state is the senior official in charge of overseeing elections, agreed to suspend the state’s practice of not processing voter-registration applications from any voter whose information did not precisely match information already on file with the state. Under this practice, applications could be held for a single missing hyphen, accent or letter—or if the registrar felt a signature was not a close enough match to the signature already on file—regardless of whether the information on file with the state was accurate. Applicants with inaccurate forms were notified and given 40 days to rectify the discrepancy, regardless of whether they caused it, or they were struck from the rolls. Several other states have rejected such stringent procedures for being too burdensome to voters. A group of civil-rights groups sued the state, charging that between 2013 and 2016 Georgia rejected nearly 35,000 applications, and that black applicants were eight times more likely than whites—and Latinos and Asian-Americans six times more likely—to be rejected. Though Mr Kemp denied the allegations of bias, he suspended the practice, and five months later settled the lawsuit by agreeing to several reforms. But with just weeks left before Georgia’s election for governor—in which Mr Kemp is not just overseer, but also the Republican nominee—“exact match” is back in the news. Soon after Mr Kemp’s office agreed to that settlement, Georgia passed a law reinstating the “exact match” requirement, but giving voters 26 months to correct any discrepancies. A recent investigation by the Associated Press found that 70% of the more than 53,000 applications currently on hold came from black voters (just 32% of Georgians are black). Kristen Clarke, who heads the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights, one of the groups that sued Mr Kemp in 2016 and is suing him again, alleges that Mr Kemp is “enforcing [the law] knowing full well the discriminatory effect that we demonstrated in 2016, and knowing full well the discriminatory effect it has today.” Mr Kemp denies such charges, instead blaming the New Georgia Project—a voter-registration group founded by his Democratic rival, Stacey Abrams—for failing, in his office’s words, to “adequately train canvassers to ensure legible, complete forms.” If Ms Abrams wins on November 6th she will be the first black female governor in America. Voters with flagged applications can still vote using a regular ballot, as long as they provide valid ID that shows a "substantial match" to information on file with the state. But some still fear the law could have a chilling effect. And some voters with flagged forms say they were never made aware of any problems. The exact-match controversy is not the only perceived threat to voting rights in Georgia. An investigation by the Brennan Centre, a law and public-policy think-tank and advocacy group found that between 2012 and 2016 Georgia purged 1.5m voters from its rolls—750,000 more than it did in the previous cycle. In all, 156 of the state’s 159 counties saw increased purge rates. Last year alone Mr Kemp’s office purged 670,000 people from the rolls. And at least 400 mail-in ballots from Gwinnett County—a diverse region north-east of Atlanta—have been rejected, accounting for 40% of all rejections statewide. The rejection rate for Asian-American voters is four times higher than that of whites; the rate for black voters is three times higher than for white voters. Mr Kemp’s campaign spokesman says the secretary is “fighting to protect the integrity of our elections.” Others see a more sinister motive.  Georgia is a rapidly diversifying state. Central to Ms Abrams’s strategy has been registering and motivating hundreds of thousands of young and non-white voters. In previous recent cycles Georgia Democrats have assumed such voters would just tag along, as they nominated unthreatening white moderates designed to appeal to swing voters, an increasingly hypothetical group. Ms Abrams has turned that strategy on its head, and it seems to be working: polls show a tight race. But rather than appealing to this increasingly diverse electorate, Mr Kemp has instead run hard to the right, threatening to round up “criminal illegals” in his big truck, and revelling in the president’s endorsement. He has promised to protect a prominent Confederate monument carved into Stone Mountain, just outside Atlanta, from the "radical left". He has blamed “outside agitators” for voting-rights controversies—a phrase used by 20th century segregationists to dismiss civil-rights protests. And he has warned Republicans that Democrats are “registering all these minority voters that are out there and others that are sitting on the sidelines, if they can do that, they can win these elections in November”. Read that sentence again. Mr Kemp all but admits that he cannot win an election if every eligible voter votes. A major-party candidate for governor sees registering voters not as a fundamentally American and essential activity, but as a partisan threat.